


GLOBAL WARMING IN GEORGIA: Southern-fried FORECAST;
Will climate changes be mild or dire? The latest news is chilling
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 29, 2001 Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: @issue;; Next; Column
Length: 3441 words
Byline: JAY BOOKMAN
Body


Near the Brasstown Wilderness
In this narrow North Georgia stream --- no more than two or three feet across --- native brook trout still swim, feed and breed as they have for thousands of years. They've survived logging, agriculture, even the stocking of the more aggressive rainbow trout, an exotic import from Europe.
But the Georgia brookies will not survive global warming.
If temperatures rise as predicted, mountain streams in this state will become too warm to sustain the brook trout, J. Donald Meisner, a zoologist at the University of Toronto, predicts in a study.
That finding doesn't surprise Lee Howard, a fishing guide in North Georgia and president of the local Trout Unlimited chapter. Howard and other volunteers have hauled logs to this stream to create a habitat to help the brook trout survive. He also lobbied to close an old logging road to this area, to make it less accessible to fishermen. But he's not very optimistic.
AJC
"We're about 3,000 feet high right here," says Howard, crouching beneath the canopy of azalea over the streambed. "And this is one of the last strongholds of reproducing brook trout in the state. After this, they really don't have any place to go."
For more than a decade, scientists have been investigating what climate change could do to the environment. Through computer models, field research, laboratory experiments and other work, they are beginning to paint a picture of a much-changed planet.
For most people, though, the global scale of the potential change is hard to grasp. An average worldwide temperature increase of 5 or 10 degrees seems abstract until you see Howard standing near this mountain stream, contemplating the disappearance of the trout he is working to save.
To discover what else global warming might have in store for Georgia, we consulted scores of published studies, talked to dozens of scientists around the country and studied assessments compiled by regional, national and international panels of experts. The predictions range from the almost benign to the downright disastrous.
In a report released in April, for example, the National Science and Technology Council tried to predict the impact of climate change on the United States. The council used two computer climate models, one in Canada, the other at the Hadley Centre for Climate Change in the United Kingdom.
The Hadley model predicts a warmer and wetter climate for Georgia, with an average warming of about 5 degrees Fahrenheit and gradually increasing rainfall. Here in the North Georgia mountains, the Hadley scenario would force the brook trout and a few other mountain creatures farther north, out of Georgia. But the mountains, like most of the state, would remain much the same. The temperate forests of mixed hardwoods and pines that now cover the state would remain.
Under the Canadian model, however, the changes would be far more dramatic. Average annual temperatures rise by 9 degrees, and because the Atlantic storm track moves eastward, out over the ocean, rainfall in the eastern United States would drop significantly.
As soon as 2030, annual rainfall in the Southeast declines by 20 percent under the Canadian scenario, a devastating permanent drought that would reduce streams like this to a relative trickle. Most of the lush North Georgia mountains, dominated by red oaks, rhododendrons, pines and mountain laurel, would become open savannas much like those in Florida.
Only here, in the highest, coolest reaches of the Georgia mountains, would a remnant of the Southern forests still cling to life.
"Current Southern ecosystems might be even more productive and more efficient than they are now," says Ron Neilson, a biogeographer with the U.S. Forest Service in Corvallis, Ore. "You'd have more rainfall and warmer temperatures. But the higher temperatures and lower rainfall produced in the Canadian model --- they would have profound consequences for your region."
So which forecast is more likely to be accurate?
"If the models all give the same answer about a particular outcome, we get a sense that they're probably right," says Robert Dickenson, professor of atmosphere dynamics and climate at Georgia Tech. "If they give different answers, as they have for the Southeast, then we have to look at the models as giving us a range of possibilities."
Both models predict an increase in the July heat index --- a combination of heat and humidity.  The Hadley model predicts an increase of 8 to 15 degrees, the Canadian one an increase of 25 degrees or more.
Those conditions "may serve to decrease population migration toward the Southeast," the science council report warns.
"If the projected rise in the heat index were to occur," the federal report concludes, "summertime conditions for New York City could become like those now experienced in Atlanta, those in Atlanta like those now experienced in Houston and those in Houston like those in Panama."
 
mpact in Vienna
Chuck Ellis is on the telephone, giving directions to his office in Vienna, about 55 miles south of Macon.
"You just go a couple blocks past the red light," says Ellis, the agricultural extension agent for Dooly County. "It's the only red light in town. It's the only red light in the county, for that matter."
Vienna --- pronounced Vy-enna --- is a little farm town of less than 3,000. The surrounding countryside is lush with cotton and peanut plants, and the town itself is dominated by the infrastructure of modern agriculture: tractor shops, fertilizer tanks, crop-storage silos and well-worn, mud-splattered pickup trucks.
It's doesn't seem like the kind of place on the cutting edge of anything. But for 15 years, Ellis and the farmers of Dooly County may have been pioneers in dealing with the impact of climate change.
Since the mid-'80s, Ellis says, local farmers have had to struggle with long periods of drought interspersed with torrential rain and even floods. In 1994, for example, Ellis was called in to aid in the disaster relief effort in the nearby towns of Albany and Montezuma after heavy rains flooded the Flint River, killing 30.
Can he recall the last year of normal rainfall?
"Normal? What's that?" Ellis chuckles.
Aris Georgakakos, director of the Georgia Water Resources Institute at Georgia Tech, believes that pattern of irregular rainfall may be an early harbinger of a rapidly changing climate.
"The computer models project the climate going through cycles that are more intense, with more variability in rainfall," Georgakakos says. "And if you look at the record, you see just that kind of pattern happening around the state."
That irregular rainfall has already forced Dooly County farmers to change how they do things, says Ellis.  Farmers are also adopting new techniques that help retain water on their fields.
Ironically, say scientists, the rainfall worries of Dooly County farmers might be eased with help from a very unlikely source.
The primary gas implicated in global warming is carbon dioxide, which is released when fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas are burned for energy. Once in the atmosphere, CO2 acts like a glass greenhouse. It allows solar energy to penetrate to the Earth's surface, then traps the heat before it can escape into space. Both the Hadley and Canadian models assume that we will continue to rely on fossil fuels, and that CO2 levels will double by 2100.
However, carbon dioxide also plays a critical role in photosynthesis. If the concentration of C02 in the atmosphere doubles by 2100, research suggests that it could also double the rate of photosynthesis in some plants. Additional C02 also reduces the amount of water that a plant requires. It could partially offset less rainfall.
Thanks in part to more C02, per-acre yields of unirrigated peanuts could rise 14 to 17 percent in Georgia by the end of the century, research by Shrikent Jagtap, a professor of agriculture and biological engineering at the University of Florida, predicts. Peanut yields on irrigated land would rise 2 to 7 percent.
Overall, agricultural productivity in the Southeast would increase by more than 10 percent by 2030 and by more than 20 percent by 2100, computer crop models show.
Like Jagtap's work, those models assume climate change will follow the more moderate Hadley pattern. If instead the climate follows the hotter, drier course suggested in the Canadian scenario, the result is disaster. The report of the National Science and Technology Council refers to "rather dramatic negative effects" on agriculture in the Southeast, which is an understatement. By 2030, studies predict a decline in the Southeast's agricultural output of more than 60 percent under the Canadian model.
In the end, even the more friendly Hadley model could spell trouble for agriculture in the Southeast.
"The South's problem is that it's already warm to begin with," says Linda Mearns, a scientist with the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado. "Other regions are going to benefit a lot more than you are from global warming."
For example, although productivity could jump by 10 or 20 percent here in the South, crop models predict that agricultural productivity will rise by 120 percent in the Great Lakes region, mainly because warmer temperatures would lengthen its growing season.
"We know there are changes coming," says Ellis. "They always do. We have to do more research, and we have to use that research to educate people, which is what I do here. We have to prepare in case it comes, and that way we'll be OK if it doesn't."
 
Options for the coast
In the yellow light of early evening, the marshes of coastal Georgia almost glow with an eerie green phosphorescence. The roads are busy with summer traffic as families flee the beach and head back to their air-conditioned hotel rooms, condos or rental homes.
But those beautiful marshes and beaches that enticed them here are in danger of disappearing.
"When you speak in terms of geologic time, the oceans have fallen and risen many times," says David Evans, assistant administrator at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA. "And every time in the past, the marshes and beaches have just moved as the ocean moved. But this time, there's a wrinkle in the process."
That wrinkle, says Evans, is the built environment --- the roads, parking lots, homes and businesses that now line the coast. As the sea advances, marshes and beaches will naturally attempt to move inland as well. But as they do, they'll run smack up against those man-made structures.
That leaves mankind two options. We can retreat, pulling back from the coast and allowing nature to take its course. Private and public property would be lost, but the marshes and beaches that give the coast its character would have room to rebuild themselves.
The second option is to build seawalls and bulkheads along the coast, to hold the sea in its place and protect private property from the encroaching ocean. By doing so, however, the gentle transition zones between sea and land would disappear. The coastline would be "armored," with seawalls and levees.
"As a scientist, I have an easy answer on that issue," says Evans. "I just say it's a political decision."
When you walk along the beach on Jekyll Island, you can see the problem already taking shape. It's still about four hours to high tide, and in many places the beach has already disappeared. Ocean waves are breaking directly onto rock walls erected to protect inland property.
Recent research led by Stephen Leatherman, a professor at Florida International University in Miami, attributes much of the beach erosion on Jekyll and elsewhere to the early impact of a rising sea.
Years ago, when scientists first began warning about global warming, the specter of rising sea levels seemed to grab public attention. There was talk of coastal cities being abandoned, of half of Florida disappearing beneath the Atlantic Ocean, of the polar ice caps melting into the ocean and moving the coast inland by miles.
Since then, more sophisticated computer models have greatly moderated the amount of sea rise expected. The polar ice caps are now considered safe, and scientists predict a sea rise of just 19 inches in the next century, with a possible range of between 5 inches and 37 inches.
The cause of that rise is relatively simple.
Take a look at a thermometer: As the temperature increases, the liquid in the glass tube expands and rises. The same phenomenon accounts for a rising sea level under global warming. If the planet warms, sea water will also warm. And as the water warms, the oceans will expand and rise in their sea beds.
In some parts of the country, including Georgia, the impact of rising seas will be compounded by a sinking land mass. At Fort Pulaski, near Savannah, scientists say the land has been sinking at about a foot a century. Leatherman thinks that sinking may be caused by overpumping of the Floridan aquifer, the source of fresh water for coastal communities and industry. As water is pumped out of the aquifer, the land settles.
Combine those two effects --- a best-guess rise of 19 inches in sea level over the next century and a continued drop of a foot along coastal Georgia --- and parts of the coast would experience a 31-inch rise in sea level.
In other parts of the country, a rise that size may not have much impact. On the steep, craggy coast of Maine, for example, a two-foot rise in sea level would just move the ocean higher up the rocks. Along the gently sloping Georgia coast, however, a 31-inch rise would on average bring the ocean inland by about 175 yards.
It's also a serious cause for alarm on barrier islands. Left to nature, islands such as Jekyll, Cumberland, St. Simons and Sapelo would migrate inland, pushed toward shore by storms and the rising sea. Scientists fear man-made structures would keep the islands in place, and as a result make them more vulnerable to storms.
However, Leatherman says that Georgia's barrier islands are less vulnerable to rising seas than those in other coastal areas.
"The good news is that your barrier islands are short and stubby, with some elevation on them," Leatherman says. "They're going to fare much better than the islands of the Outer Banks in North Carolina, for example. Those islands are long and skinny, and they're going to be in real trouble."
The sun is setting on the coast now, and the green marshes take on an almost golden hue. Flocks of white wading birds erupt from the marshes and make their way in the fading light to the trees where they'll roost for the night. Later, on the beaches of the barrier islands, endangered loggerhead turtles will come to shore, dig a hole in the sand and lay their eggs, just as they have for thousands of years.
But if the marshes and the beaches disappear, the turtles, birds and other creatures will disappear with them.
  
Potential toll on trees
Burke County, about 50 miles south of Augusta, doesn't look much like Texas or Nebraska. At least not yet. The countryside here is dominated by trees --- acre after acre, row after row of pine trees, most raised for pulp to make paper.
Burke is also one of the poorest counties in the state. In 1998, its per capita income of $15,607 ranked 154th of the state's 159 counties. Yet that year, roughly $40 million in timber was pulled off its land.
The county has a lot at stake with global warming. If the climate turns warmer and wetter, as the Hadley model projects, productivity of southern pine plantations is expected to increase by 11 percent by 2040. Most of that increased growth would come from the effects of additional C02 in the atmosphere.
But there's another possibility. In 30 years, the trees could all be gone. If rainfall declines 20 percent as projected by the Canadian scenario, most of Georgia's coastal plain, now part of the nation's "woodbasket," would be converted into open grasslands like that of Texas or Nebraska. Runoff into the nearby Savannah River would drop by 61 percent by 2030.
Without rainfall, the trees would dry out and become vulnerable to beetles and other pests. Lightning-caused fire would increase by 25 to 50 percent and would become the Southeast's prime landscape architect.
"We know drought is going to come every so often," says Ed Stephens, who owns more than 200 acres of timberland in Burke County. "It's just part of what we deal with. But if this global warming plays out like these scientists say . . .  boy, I guess we'll just have to move."
However, if scientists are right about the climate, those farmers might be better off switching to hardwoods and mixed pine plantations. Hardwoods require less water than pines. Under the Hadley scenario, hardwood productivity in the Southeast rises by 22 percent by 2040, compared to 11 percent for pines.
"It's scary," says Mark Raines, Burke County agent for the Georgia Forestry Commission. "The last few years we've seen an increase in pine-beetle infestations, which to me means the trees are suffering from drought stress." He also notes a significant increase in lightning fires in Burke County the past two years.
For natural forests in the region, the outlook is less promising. Research suggests that most trees will not be able to take full advantage of increased C02 because of a lack of other nutrients in the soil. In the managed tree plantations that dominate much of south and central Georgia, foresters could overcome that problem by adding fertilizers and adjusting the genetic makeup of trees to take full advantage of a warmer climate.
"There's a lot that we still don't know that could have a very negative environmental impact," says Rodney Will, an assistant professor at the University of Georgia's School of Forestry. "But for purposes of plantation forestry, the effect will probably be beneficial. The more controlled the system, the easier it is to capture the effect of enhanced CO2."
However, if the state's climate moves toward the drier Canadian model rather than the Hadley model, all bets are off. Even trees in managed plantations would have a hard time.
And for people in Burke County, already struggling to make a living, that's worrisome. "Look at this," says Raines, waving a pamphlet on global warming published by the state forestry commission. "It says that the United States has only 5 percent of the world's population, but we produce a quarter of the carbon dioxide. We're the ones causing this problem. We're the ones who have to fix it."
 
Scientists embrace theory
But all that, of course, still begs the real question: Is global warming real?
For those of us who aren't scientists, it's impossible to make an independent, educated judgment on that.
As a rule, though, scientists are very protective of their reputations. They don't like conjecture, and they're reluctant to go out on a limb. So their willingness to embrace the theory of rapid, man-made climate change is a pretty good indication of their confidence. If they turn out to be wrong, the global warming scare will go down as the biggest embarrassment in the history of science.
It's also telling how closely the theoretical work of scientists is being echoed by independent reports from people who live on the land and are intimate with its rhythms.
Lee Howard says that in one North Georgia watershed, weather changes over the past eight years have driven brook trout about a mile farther upstream, seeking cooler water.
Chuck Ellis says that 10 years ago, maybe 25 percent of Dooly County's cropland was irrigated. Now it's doubled, to about 50 percent.
And in timber-dependent Burke County, Mark Raines reports that for the past five years, some tree farmers have begun to plant drought-tolerant pine seedlings purchased from East Texas.
If those signs of global warming prove correct, the question then becomes more specific: What direction will warming take? The Canadian and Hadley models are just two of several global models, and the climate could change in ways unanticipated by any of them.
For technical reasons, some scientists studying climate change in the Southeast tend to favor the Hadley scenario as more accurate for the region. They also point out that if the Canadian scenario does prove more accurate, the changes would be so dramatic that trying to anticipate their impact would be almost hopeless.
However, as U.S. scientists were concluding their national assessment this spring, the Hadley Centre in Great Britain released a third generation of its model, which it believes is more accurate. The results are sobering.
"The newest results from the Hadley," says David Easterling, principal scientist for the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C. "are beginning to resemble the Canadian model."

Graphic

 
Photo:
A great egret tests the waters on Jekyll Island, where beach erosion is attributed to the early impact of rising seas under global warming. Higher temperatures also would prevent mountain streams from being able to maintain brook trout (below)./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
Jabori Williams, 3, of Brunswick (above), plays in the surf at Jekyll Island./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
The Atlantic Ocean advances on St. Simons Island (top). Jabori Williams, 3, of Brunswick (above), plays in the surf at Jekyll Island. Along Georgia's coast, options for the future are to retreat and let nature take its course, or build bulkheads to keep the sea in place./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
If the marshes --- such as this one between St. Simons Island and Brunswick --- and the beaches disappear, the turtles, birds and other creatures will disappear with them./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
The already endangered would vanish from its native Georgia if mountain streams become too warm./ CURTIS COMPTON / Staff Photo:
Fishing guide Lee Howard leans out over a creek near Hiawassee in pursuit of brook trout. The fish would be pushed out of the area by global warming./ CURTIS COMPTON / Staff
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FISHES (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); FORESTRY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); MOUNTAINS (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); WEATHER (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (78%); MODELING & SIMULATION (77%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (76%); ZOOLOGY (76%); VOLUNTEERS (69%)

Company: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT LLC  (52%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT LLC  (52%);    TROUT UNLIMITED   (56%);  TROUT UNLIMITED  (56%)

Organization: TROUT UNLIMITED   (56%);  TROUT UNLIMITED  (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); FORESTRY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); FORESTRY & LOGGING (89%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (89%); MODELING & SIMULATION (77%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (91%); ONTARIO, CANADA (57%); CANADA (92%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (72%)

Load-Date: July 29, 2001


End of Document







| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2021 LexisNexis 






Page 3 of 4GLOBAL WARMING IN GEORGIA: Southern-fried FORECAST;Will climate changes be mild or dire? The latest news is chilling


 


 

