


Political Conditions Tuvalu
CountryWatch Reviews
March 22, 2021


Copyright 2021 CountryWatch Inc. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved


Length: 10110 words
Body


Political Chronology

Introduction

Tuvalu's primary concerns since independence have been economic. The country has very limited natural resources, and both colonialism and World War II served to diminish its limited resource base even further. Tuvalu expects to lose a major source of employment income in the near future, since many Tuvaluans work at the phosphate mines in neighboring Nauru, projected to reach final depletion around the turn of the 21st century.

Tuvalu has made compensation claims against the United Kingdom in regard to its dilapidated infrastructure and in particular for damage caused by the construction of Allied air bases during World War II. Indeed, in 1991, the government of Tuvalu announced that it was drafting a compensation claim regarding the terrible state of the country's finances at the time of independence.

Recently, Tuvalu and neighboring islands have begun discussing the possibility of uniting to address their economic, infrastructural and environmental concerns.

In 1996, the government decentralized, placing various departments on other islands, and delegating government responsibilities to island-based councils. Despite the country's ongoing dispute with the United Kingdom, Tuvaluans have consistently voted against motions to establish a republic, though reconstitution of Tuvalu's government along republican lines remains a possibility.

Political Developments from the 1990s to 2009

Tuvalu has seen repeated changes of government as a result of non-confidence motions in parliament. In 1995, Prime Minister Kamuta Latasi -- who was elected to head the government by parliament after indecisive general elections -- attempted to remove Tuvalu from the British Commonwealth and take steps toward initiating a republican system. In response, a coalition member named Puapua withdrew support, as did the deputy prime minister. Ultimately, Latasi lost a vote of confidence in parliament, and Paeniu succeeded him as prime minister in late 1996.

In general elections held in March 1998, Paeniu won enough support to remain prime minister. The new government initiated economic development plans and a constitutional reform plan to be implemented after dialogue with the general population. However, in a sequence of events reminiscent of what occurred a couple of years before, Paeniu's proposals provoked another vote of no confidence, putting him out of office in April 1999. The seven members of parliament who formed the majority toppling Paeniu ascribed their disapproval both to his slow progress in implementing government reforms and to concerns regarding Paeniu's alleged personal misconduct.

Parliament elected Ionatana Ionatana to replace Paeniu as prime minister. His plans include the development of the private sector, infrastructural improvements, and fulfillment of various programs launched by the previous government, notably the establishment of a national trust fund. 

Tuvalu suffered the worst disaster in its post-independence history in March 2000, a fire at a girls' dormitory that killed 18 young women. The dormitory had recently been constructed with assistance funds provided by the government of Japan.

In May 2000, Tuvalu officials finalized a contract with a United States-based Internet company set to pay US$4 million annually for 13 years. The contract confers use of Tuvalu's national domain name-the suffix ".tv" business interests forging the deal expect commercial attractiveness of the suffix to accelerate as interactive video applications become more widespread. The revenues derived from the usage of the suffix has been used to construct schools and to pave roads, which have customarily been made of crushed coral.

In December 2000, Prime Minister Ionatana Ionatana died of a heart attack, while reviewing a public function in the capital Funafuti. Ionatana had been prime minister for just under two years but had won international recognition for his deep concerns over climate change and the impact it is having on low-lying atoll nations such as Tuvalu. He had also won praise for developing Tuvalu's self-sufficiency through a project in which Tuvalu is gaining millions of dollars selling its dot.tv Internet suffix.. Ionatana, a former policeman and top civil servant, also spoke strongly in support of the rights of indigenous Fijians in Fiji following the May 19 coup by indigenous Fijian gunmen led by George Speight. Ionatana's deputy, Lagitupu Tuilimu, the deputy prime minister in Ionatana government, took charge as the acting prime minister upon Ionatana's death. Subsequent prime ministers included Koloa Talake in 2001 and Saufatu Sopoanga in 2002.

Ionatana was buried with full state honors at a funeral attended by several leaders of the region, who praised the departed leader for his contribution in building Tuvalu and also the role that he played in bringing to international attention issues like global warming and the threat posed to the island nations in the Pacific.

In January 2001, Tuvalu received a grant of US$8.6 million from Japan for the construction of an inter-island vessel. An embassy statement said the new passenger and cargo ship will supplement the existing services provided by the Tuvalu government's Nivaga II. The new ship will be assigned to providing regular services from Funafuti to Tuvalu's outer islands while the Nivaga II will be used primarily for services between Tuvalu and Fiji.

In 2002, then-Prime Minister Koloa Telake started legal action against the United Kingdom on the basis of an allegedly unfair division of assets between Tuvalu and Kiribati when the two were divided at the time of independence.

Also in 2002, elections were held in Tuvalu. In the parliamentary elections to the Fale I Fono or House of Assembly held on July 25, 2002, various independents won the 15 available seats. On August 2, 2002, an election was held within the parliament for the position of prime minister. In the election, Saufatu Sopoanga was elected prime minister with 8 votes in favor of his leadership, to Amasone Kilei's 7 votes.

In May 2003, by-elections were held and Prime Minister Sopoanga lost a one seat majority. Members of the opposition asked that the parliament be recalled so that a non-confidence vote could be heard. Several months later, however, the issue was unresolved. As such, opposition members were asking to see the Governor General in regard to the matter.

Throughout 2002 and well into 2003, Tuvalu, along with many other small Pacific island nation states, was faced with the disturbing environmental consequences of climate change. In recent academic studies, attention has been focused on the threat to island coastal areas as temperatures increase, polar ice caps melt and sea level rises as a result. The impact upon small island nations around the world is potentially dangerous. Until recently, less attention has been given to the more immediate effect, which is the matter of freshwater quality and availability.

At present, between 50 and 70 percent of the residents of Samoa have access to safe and drinkable water; in Kiribati and Tuvalu, the number drops to less than 45 percent. Other island nations, such as the Marshall Islands and Micronesia have had to deal with droughts and as rainwater or groundwater are their only freshwater resources, the effects on the population in the region is potentially dangerous. With global warming, droughts are predicted to increase along with the possibility of water shortages; the loss of freshwater resources could cause island nations such as Kiribati and Tuvalu to be uninhabitable.

Islands such as Tuvalu are under threat of being washed away if increases in sea level continue, as a consequence of global warming. Some studies suggest that these islands could cease to exist in 50 years as a result of climate change. The pollution caused by developed countries has become a major bone of contention in the view of small Pacific island states.  (Indeed, as recently as early 2004, locals noticed sea water bubbling up from the soil on the main atoll of Tuvalu in places normally used for flooding.)

In this regard, Tuvalu's former Prime Minister Koloa Talake, along with the leaders of Kiribati and Maldives, intended to launch a lawsuit and other legal measures against polluting countries. His successor, Saufatu Sopoanga, is expected to follow suit. Because of its close proximity, Australia is one of the first countries targeted for legal action, which will be decided in the International Court of Justice (ICJ). Because Australia accepts ICJ jurisdiction, it is considered to be a prime target in such lawsuits.

Meanwhile, New Zealand's government offered assistance in resettling islanders who were being affected by the dangerous rise in sea levels. As well, Australia's overseas aid program established a "land and sea-level" monitoring station in Tuvalu. 

The need for transnational policy on the matter is urgent, however, the countries of this region have very little leverage in the international sphere, especially since the United States and Australia have refused to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. Environmental issues of this sort are becoming the primary concern of the people and policy-makers in Pacific countries in 2003 and beyond.

Moving to the local political agenda, in August 2004, the country's prime minister, Safatu Sopoanga, suffered a huge setback when a parliament ousted his government in a no-confidence vote. 

With the country's Governor General Faimalaga Luka set to reconvene a swearing-in ceremony for the opposition's new government, several members of the outgoing government did not present themselves at the state house.  Instead,  Safatu Sopoanga announced his resignation from his position as prime minister, effectively forcing a by-election. 

The move was presumably intended to give Sopoanga's cadre more time to consolidate their base of political power base so they could retain leadership in the government.  To this end, they hoped to bring back to their side a member of parliament who had earlier crossed the floor. 

Meanwhile, as these events unfolded, Matia Toafa was made caretaker prime minister until the matter could be resolved. As head of government, Prime Minister Toafa led a review of the Constitution and promised to convene a referendum on whether the British monarch should be replaced as the Head of State -- in effect, moving the country toward the status of a republic.

But in 2006, attention turned to fresh elections, which went off in a free and fair manner on Aug. 3, 2006.  Final results showed that most incumbents had been defeated -- including the vast majority of the cabinet members.  Indeed, the prime minister was an exception, although he would not continue on in his capacity as head of government, as noted below.

The new parliament held its first session on Aug. 14, 2006.  Apisai Ielemia  was chosen to be head of government and Prime Minister. In his inaugural speech,  Prime Minister  Ielemia  made it clear that his policy agenda would include increased media freedom, good governance, transparency and accountability.

In 2007, Tuvalu's envoy to the United Nations, Afelee Pita,  addressed a special session of the United Nations Security Council dealing with the issue of global warming, climate change and the concomitant effect of the rise in sea level in small island nations.  

Two years later, in 2009,  the main issue facing Tuvalu -- as with many small island nations in the South Pacific --  continued to be the matter of geographic survival and its vulnerability to climate change. 

Climate change resulting in the rise in sea level, augmented by high tides, has resulted in beach erosion, soil poisoning,an inability to grow crops, street flooding including main thoroughfares being completely submerged, as well as threats to homes and livelihoods.  Of particular concern is the fact  that a rise in the  saltwater table could destroy deep rooted food crops such as coconut and taro.
Tuvalu is not much higher than sea level.  In 1978, a tide gauge was installed in Tuvalu by the University of Hawaii to measure the rise of sea level.  It measured a rise of 1.2 millimeters per year over 23 years.  This finding coincided with the research from the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC), which showed a  global mean estimated increase  of 1 to 2 millimeters per year over the 20th century.  The IPCC has said that there could be a 40 centimeter increase in sea level by the close of the 21st century -- a level that could have catastrophic effects for a country such as Tuvalu. 

Because Tuvalu is composed of  coral islands, land reclamation is a far more difficult endeavor than in other parts of the world.  Thus, the issue of global climate change has a particularly marked effect in Tuvalu and dominates this country's interests, agenda and policy initiatives.

This issue had other geopolitical implications when, in 2009, Taiwan extended an offer  of assistance to Tuvalu as regards the effects of climate change and the rise in sea level.  Tuvalu has been one of few countries to officially recognize Taiwan as a sovereign nation -- quite separate from Beijing rule. 

Also in  2009, Tuvalu made the decision to apply for membership in the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Special Report on United Nations Climate Change Summit in Copenhagen 

In December 2009, the United Nations Climate Change Summit opened  in the Danish capital of Copenhagen. The summit was scheduled to last from Dec. 7-18, 2009. Delegates from more than 190 countries were in attendance, and approximately 100 world leaders, including British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and United States President Barack Obama, were expected to participate. At issue was the matter of new reductions targets on greenhouse gas emissions by 2020.

On Dec. 9, 2009, four countries -- the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico and Norway -- presented a document outlining ideas for raising and managing billions of dollars, which would be intended to help vulnerable countries dealing with the perils of climate change.  Described as a "green fund," the concept could potentially help small island states at risk because of the rise in sea level.  The "green fund" would fall under the rubric of  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, for which developed countries have been committed to quantifying their emission reduction targets, and also to  providing financial and technical support to developing countries.

On Dec. 11, 2009, China demanded that developed and wealthy countries in Copenhagen should help deliver a real agreement on climate change by delivering on their promises to reduce carbon emissions and provide financial support for developing countries to adapt to global warming.  China's Vice Foreign Minister  also emphasized the fact that climate change was "a matter of survival" for developing countries, and accordingly, such countries need wealthier and more developed countries to accentuate not only their pledges of emissions reduction targets, but also their financial commitments under the aforementioned  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  To that end, scientists and leaders of small island states in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea, have highlighted  the existential threat posed by global warming and the concomitant rise in sea level.
China and India were joined by Brazil and South Africa in the crafting of a draft document calling for a new global climate treaty to be completed  by June 2010. Of concern has been the realization that there was insufficient time to find concurrence on a full legal treaty, which would leave countries only with a politically-binding text by the time the summit at Copenhagen closed. But Guyana's leader, President Bharrat Jagdeo, warned that the summit in Denmark would  be classified as a failure unless a binding document was agreed upon instead of just political consensus. He urged his cohorts to act with purpose saying, "Never before have science, economics, geo-strategic self-interest and politics intersected in such a way on an issue that impacts everyone on the planet."
Likewise, Tuvalu demanded that  legally binding agreements emerge from Copenhagen.  Its proposal was supported by many of the vulnerable countries, from small island states and sub-Saharan Africa, all of whom warned of  the catastrophic impact of climate change on their citizens.  Tuvalu also called for more aggressive action, such as  an amendment to the 1992 agreement, which would focus on sharp greenhouse gas emissions and the accepted rise in temperatures, due to the impact the rise in seas. The delegation from Kiribati joined the call by drawing attention to the fact that one village had to be abandoned due to waist-high water, and  more such effects were likely to follow.  Kiribati's Foreign Secretary, Tessie Lambourne, warned  that the people of Kiribati could well be faced with no homeland in the future  saying, "Nobody in this room would want to leave their homeland." But despite such impassioned pleas and irrespective of warnings from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  that the rise in sea level from melting polar ice caps would deleteriously affect low-lying atolls such as such as Tuvalu and Kiribati in the Pacific, and the Maldives in the Indian Ocean, the oil-giant Saudi Arabia was able to block this move.

By Dec. 12, 2009, details related to a draft document prepared by Michael Zammit Cutajar, the head of the Ad-hoc Working Group on Long-Term Cooperative Action, were released at the  Copenhagen climate conference.  Included in the document were calls for  countries to make major reductions in carbon emissions over the course of the next decade.  According to the Washington Post, industrialized countries were called on to make cuts of between 25 percent and 40 percent below 1990 levels -- reductions that were far more draconian than the United States was likely to accept.  As discussed above, President Obama had offered a provisional reduction target of 17 percent.  The wide gap between the released draft and the United States' actual stated position suggested there was much more negotiating in the offing if a binding agreement could be forged, despite the Obama administration's claims that it was seeking greater engagement on this issue.

The division between developed and developing countries in Copenhagen reached new heights on Dec. 14, 2009, when some of the poor and less developed countries launched a boycott at the summit. The move, which was spurred by African countries but backed by China and India,  appeared to be geared toward redirecting attention and primary responsibility to the wealthier and more industrialized countries.  The impasse was resolved after the  wealthier and more industrialized countries offered assurances that they did not intend on shirking from their commitments to reducing greenhouse gases.  As a result, the participating countries ceased the boycott.

Primer on parliamentary elections of 2010 in Tuvalu
A parliamentary election was scheduled to be held in Tuvalu on September 16, 2010. At stake were the 15 seats in the "Fale I Fono" or unicameral parliament, also called  the House of Assembly.  Typically, members of parliament are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms, with all seats in the past held by independents.
Parliament was dissolved on August 13, 2010, ahead of the scheduled election date, and in preparation for the national elections.  Ahead of voting day, Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia led a caretaker government for one month.  Prime Minister Ielemia, who completed his first term in office, was hoping to stay on at the helm of government.
The outgoing Tuvalu government said that its priority for the future would be on the development of outer islands. Home Affairs Minister Willie Telavi noted that outer island development had been neglected in the past. Indeed, Tuvalu has been faced with significant geographical and financial challenges in delivering services to the eight atolls of Tuvalu.

Early election results indicated that  Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia was among ten sitting members of parliament re-elected to power.  Also re-elected to power were the incumbent ministers of finance, health and foreign affairs.

The prime minister would therefore seek to form a new coalition government before the end of the month.
But on September 22, 2010, five new members of parliament, who make up a full third of the legislative body, warned that the new government would not be reconstituted at the helm of the country. One such  member of parliament, Enele Sopoanga said, "There's no way that the former government will come back."  In an interview with PacNews, he continued, "There is going to be a change of government early next week and the horse trading for numbers have begun."  Whether or not the new government would include  Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia was yet to be determined.  Indeed, any new government would require the support of eight members of parliament.

Tuvalu Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia gained international cachet in 2009 when, in Copenhagen,  he lobbied for global action against the perils of climate change and the effects of the concomitant rise of sea levels on the lives of people living in small island nations.

On September 29, 2010, in the aftermath of the aforementioned elections and in an internal vote in parliament, it was former Prime Minister Matia Toafa and not Aposai Ielemia who was elected as the new head of government.  It was a reversal of fortune of sorts for the two politicians since Toafa had once lost his seat to Ielemia.  Toafa garnered nine votes in his favor, including five votes from the newly-elected members of parliament, who had signaled that they were in favor of a change in government.

Toafa was inaugurated into office right after the internal parliamentary vote by Governor General Iakopa Italeli Taeia.

In his first public interview with Radio Tuvalu, the new prime minister called on his cabinet to work on behalf of the people of Tuvalu. 

Meanwhile, all five of the new members of parliament were accorded key cabinet positions, including the portfolios for finance, which went to newcomer, Monise Laafai,  and health, which went to journalist, Sauoa Maani.  As well, former diplomat and climate change negotiator, Enele Sopoanga, was given the portfolio for foreign affairs, environment and labor.  All eight cabinet ministers were sworn into office following Prime Minister Toafa's inauguration.

Recent Developments

On Dec. 22, 2010, Tuvalu's parliament was dissolved following a no-confidence vote against Prime Minister Maatia Toafa.  The confidence motion passed successfully when one cabinet minister -- Willy Telavi -- crossed the floor to vote in favor of the motion.  There appeared to be a financial motivation for the vote with members of parliament concerned about the forthcoming budget and allocations for island development, medical treatment costs, and salaries of state workers.  Soon thereafter, nominations were taking place for possible successors to Toafa for the job of head of government.  To that end, the cross-over voter, Willy Telavi, was ultimately elected to take on the role of head of government.  Telavi,  a former police commissioner who held the post of Minister of Home Affairs in the cabinet of Prime Minister Toafa,  was elected on Dec. 24, 2010, defeating Foreign Affairs and Environment Minister Eneke Sopoaga  by a razor thin 8-7 vote.
Telavi's government was at risk more than two years later when at the start of July 2013, Tuvalu's opposition requested that the country's governor general use his special powers to reconvene parliament.  At issue was the result of a by-election that resulted in victory for an opposition candidate for a vacant seat in parliament.  That outcome essentially meant that the government lost its narrow parliamentary majority.  As such, the opposition wanted to have the parliamentary distribution of seats to be confirmed, potentially setting the scene for a no-confidence vote, which could oust the sitting government from power.  For his part, Tuvalu Prime Minister Willy Tevali has not been in a hurry to reconvene parliament given the fact that the government no longer commanded a parliamentary majority.  See below for details.

Parliamentary session in Tuvalu results in ousting of government and election of new PM

An important parliamentary session loomed ahead in Tuvalu, which was expected to decide the fate of the government of Prime Minister Willy Telavi.

At issue was a victory for the opposition in a by-election for a seat on Nukufetau Island  held in mid-June 2013, which offered the opposition the position to command a parliamentary majority.  Now the composition in parliament gave the government seven seats and the opposition eight seats.  Assuming the members of the parliament voted in lockstep with their blocs, such a distribution of parliamentary seats would set the path in motion to bring down the government of Prime Minister Willy Tevali. Anxious to test the possibility that it could form a new government, the opposition has been angling for a new parliamentary session in which it could bring forth a confidence vote.

At the start of July 2013, Tuvalu's governor general, Sir Lakoba Italeli, acquiesced to the calls from the opposition and ordered parliament to sit in session on July 30, 2013. It would be the first sitting of parliament since late December 2012 when the member of parliament passed a budget.  This session at the end of July 2013 would predictably include the introduction of a no-confidence motion by the opposition against the Tevali government.

It should be noted that Tuvalu's political scene has been marked by stalemate since late 2012 with the only productive bit of business done at the time was the passage of the budget, as noted above. Now, according to Opposition Spokesperson Taukalina Finikaso, it was way past time to shift the dynamics. As noted by Finikaso, "We have been in this uncertainty for quite a long period. It is seven months now and we cannot continue on like this without parliament meeting and without the nation knowing what is happening. So we think it is a very good decision by the governor general and I think he has done it in the spirit of the constitution and also the democratic nation of Tuvalu."

Now, with the parliamentary session looming ahead and a no-confidence vote in the offing, the opposition was expressing confidence that it was united and had the seats to command a majority.  Accordingly, Opposition Spokesperson  Finikaso believed that voting on the confidence measure would, therefore,  go its way.  Indeed, among the opposition ranks, there were high hopes that the vote would result in the toppling of the government and the formation of a new government. But the prime minister was equally confident that he had the support to defeat the no confidence motion, thanks to the support of a couple of cross-over votes,  and he would ultimately hold sway in command of the government.  Indeed, Prime Minister  Willy Telavi's stance appeared to be that of a man spoiling for a fight he was sure to win.  It was to be seen which side would prove to be correct.

Politically, the advantage seemed to be with the opposition at the start of August 2013. First, the government's faction in parliament was short at least one vote due to the death of Finance Minister Lotoala Metia in December 2012. Second, ill health of Education Minister Falesa Pitoi meant that the government would be short an additional member.  Third, the  pro-government faction in parliament was further diminished when Health Minister Taom Tanukale resigned from parliament.  But things moved in a decidedly dismal direction for those in power when Prime MInister Telavi's government lost a motion to dissolve parliament before the anticipated  vote of no confidence could be taken against them.

The scene in parliament turned dramatic when the opposition advanced its no-confidence vote in the Telavi government only to have Tuvalu's Speaker of Parliament refuse the motion and announced an adjournment.  Governor General Iakopa Italeli Taeia entered the fray and called for the parliament to meet and resume activity. This move sparked a  battle of wills between the prime minister and the governor general when Telavi said that he was removing Governor General Iakopa Italeli Taeia from his post as the head of state. Hours later,  however, Italeli said he was removing Prime Minister Telavi and his cabinet from office and appointing the opposition leader, Enele Sopoanga, as a caretaker prime minister. The scenario  had all the makings of a constitutional crisis.  But regardless of Telavi's claim on legitimacy, the fact of the matter was that the numbers in parliament favored the parliament.

Ultimately on Aug. 2, 2013, a majority of members of parliament supported the no-confidence motion and officially brought down Telavi's government.  Later in the parliamentary session,  Enele Sopoaga --  the opposition leader -- was elected to serve as the new prime minister.

Prime Minister Sopoanga soon unveiled his cabinet and the new government was sworn into power by the governor general, Sir Iakoba Italeli in Funafuti.  Included in the government was the deputy premier, Vete Sakaio, who would also be responsible for public utilities.  Former diplomat, Finikaso Taukelina, a former diplomat,  who would become the new minister for foreign affairs. Home Affairs, which was normally part of the prime minister's portfolio, would become a separate government ministry with Namoliku Sualiki at the helm. The health portfolio and the education portfolio were merged under one ministry to be headed by Fauoa Maani. The portfolio for finance and economic development would be held by Maatia Toafa, a former prime minister.  Meanwhile,  the portfolio for communication and transport, as well as the portfolio for natural resources, would be held by  Monisa Laafai and Elisala Pita respectively.

Note: It should be noted that irrespective of the inauguration of the new Tuvalu government, its legitimacy remained a matter of debate.  There was a court decision pending over the actions taken by both the governor general and the former prime minister, leading up to the installation of the new government.
Elections Note:

Parliamentary elections were set to be held on March 19, 2015, in Tuvalu; they were delayed (as discussed below) due to Cyclone Pam and ultimately held on March 31, 2015.  At stake was the composition of the unicameral parliament, also called the House of Assembly or "Fale I Fono."  In this body, the seats are occupied by members who are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms.  There are no functional parties vying for control of the legislative chamber; instead, all members of parliament are political independents.

From 2010 to 2015, Tuvalu has seen a parade of prime ministers as rivalries, confidence motions, and political machinations have brought down one government after the other.  Since 2013, Enele Sopoaga has  served as the caretaker prime minister.  The Sopoaga government increased its majority in parliament over the course of 2014 as a result of two by-elections.  It was to be seen if the Sopoaga government  would win a mandate in the 2015 parliamentary contest.

But the answer to the question of who would lead the new Tuvalu government was left unanswered due to a weather crisis.  Cyclone Pam hit the islands of the south Pacific hard, with Tuvalu being among those particularly hard-hit. Indeed, Tuvalu's election was postponed due to the damage wrought by Cyclone Pam, which left the country in dire need of fresh water supplies and other forms of emergency assistance.

Voters finally went to the polls on March 31, 2015, and ultimately, most of the members of parliament were returned to power.  This result set the stage for  the government of Enele Sopoaga to return to power.  To that end, on April 10, 2015, it was announced officially that  Sopoaga was returned to power as Tuvalu's prime minister. In parliament he had a clear majority, given the support of 11 out of the 15 allied elected members of parliament.

Editor's Update:

Note that Tuvalu's election, scheduled to be held on March 19, 2015 as noted above,  was postponed due to the damage wrought by Cyclone Pam.  That cyclone hit the islands of the Pacific hard and  left Tuvalu in dire need of fresh water supplies and other forms of emergency assistance. 

Election of 2019:
Parliamentary elections were set to be held on Sept. 9, 2019 in Tuvalu.  At stake was the composition of the unicameral parliament, also called the House of Assembly or "Fale I Fono."  In this body, there are 16 seats occupied by members who are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms.  There are no functional parties vying for control of the legislative chamber; instead, all members of parliament are political independents. 

Following these elections, once the composition of the House of Assembly was decided, an internal vote within the legislative chamber was carried out to determine the new head of government.  Kausea Natano won 10 of the 16 votes at stake and was inaugurated as the new prime minister on Sept. 19, 2019. 

***

Environmental Note:

Small island countries announce plan to sue multinational fossil fuel corporations for their role in climate change --

In mid-2015, six small island nation states -- Vanuatu, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Fiji, Solomon Islands and  Philippines -- released a manifesto on climate change.  Dubbed the  "People's Declaration for Climate Justice,"  the declaration announced a plan to sue large multinational fossil fuel corporations, which they blamed for  carbon pollution,  the degradation to their ecosystems, and the other deleterious effects of climate change.

The highlights of the manifesto read as follows:  "We, the people of Vanuatu, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Fiji, Solomon Islands and the Philippines continue to experience the impacts of climate change -– the single biggest human rights, environmental and humanitarian crisis of our time… As the people most acutely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, we will not let the big polluters decide and assign our fate… We commit to holding those most responsible for climate change accountable. By doing so, we send a message of hope that the people and not the polluters are in charge of humanity's destiny. "  In truth, the effort to sue the world's largest fossil fuel corporations would not be a simple endeavor and  the plaintiff nation states might not even see their day in court; however, small island countries were not willing to silently accept the pressing environmental threat to their existence without seeking accountability.

Editor's Entry on Environmental Policy:

Small island nations across the world are  vulnerable to the threats posed by global warming and cimate change, derived from carbon emissions, and resulting in the rise in sea level.  Political policy in the country is often connected to ecological issues, which have over time morphed into an existential crisis of sorts.

December 2012 saw climate talks in the Qatari city of Doha.  There, representatives from countries across the world gathered to discuss the fate of the Kyoto Protocol, which seeks to minimize greenhouse gas emissions.  The summit yielded results with  decisions made (1) to extend the Kyoto Protocol until 2020, and (2) for wealthier countries to compensate poorer countries for the losses and damage incurred as a result of climate change.

There was, in fact, little progress made on the central issue of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  Had those emissions been reduced, there would have been less of a need to financially deal with the devastation caused by climate change.  One interpretation was that the global community was accepting the fact that industrialization was contributing to global warming, which had deleterious effects on the polar ice caps  and concomitantly on the rise of sea level, with devastating effects for small island nations. Thus, wealthier countries were willing to pay around $10 billion a year through 2020, effectively in "damages," to the poor countries that could be viewed as the "collateral damage" of industrial progress.  But damages today could potentially be destruction tomorrow, leaving in place the existential challenges and burdens to be born by some of the world's smallest and least wealthy island countries.

Perhaps not surprisingly, the  representative for the small island nation states at the Doha summit responded with ire, characterizing the lack of progress on reducing emissions as follows: "We see the package before us as deeply deficient in mitigation (carbon cuts) and finance. It's likely to lock us on the trajectory to a 3,4,5C rise in global temperatures, even though we agreed to keep the global average temperature rise of 1.5C to ensure survival of all islands. There is no new finance (for adapting to climate change and getting clean energy) -- only promises that something might materialize in the future. Those who are obstructive need to talk not about how their people will live, but whether our people will live."

Indeed, in most small island countries not just in the Pacific, but also the Caribbean and Indian Ocean, ecological concerns and the climate crisis have been dominant themes with dire life and death consequences looming in the background for their people.  Small island nations in these region  are already at risk from the rise of sea-level, tropical cyclones, floods.  But  their very livelihoods of fishing and subsistence farming are also at risk as a result of ecological and environmental changes.  Of particular concern is the matter of  ocean acidification, which destroys  reefs and decimates fish and shellfish populations that provide protein for inhabitants.  At the same time, increasingly high storm surges can wipe out  coastlines, and even  entire villages, while

contaminating water supplies.  Accordingly, the very existence of islands are at severe risk of being obliterated from the map.  Yet even with the existential threat of being wiped off the map in the offing, the international community has been either slow or restrictive in its efforts to deal with global warming, climate change, economic and ecological damage, as well as the emerging global challenge of environmental refugees.

A 2012  report from the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the Pacific Regional Environment Program underlined the concerns of small island nations and their people as it concluded that the livelihoods of approximately 10 million people in Pacific island communities were increasingly vulnerable to climate change. In fact, low-lying islands in that region  would likely confront  losses of up to 18 percent of gross domestic product due to climate change, according to the report. The report covers 21 countries and territories, including Fiji, Kiribati,  Samoa and Tonga, and recommended  environmental legislation intended to deal with the climate crisis facing the small island countries particularly. As noted by David Sheppard, the director general of the Pacific Regional Environment Program that co-sponsored this study: "The findings... emphasize the need more than ever to raise the bar through collective actions that address the region's environmental needs at all levels."

For more information on the threats faced in small island nations by climate change and the  measures being undertaken to lobby for international action, please see the Alliance for Small Island States available online at the URL: http://aosis.org/

Special Report

COP 21 summit in Paris ends with historic agreement to tackle climate change; rare international consensus formed on environmental crisis facing the planet --

In mid-December 2015, the highly-anticipated United Nations climate conference of parties (COP) in Paris, France, ended with a historic agreement.  In fact, it would very likely be understood as the most significant international agreement signed by all the recognized countries of the world since the Cold War.  Accordingly, the Paris Agreement was being distinguished as the first multilateral pact that would compel all countries across the world to cut its carbon emissions -- one of the major causes of increasing greenhouse gas emissions, which contribute to global warming, and its deleterious effects ranging from the dangerous rise in sea level to catastrophic climate change.

The accord, which was dubbed to be the "Paris Agreement," was the work of rigorous diplomacy and fervent environmental advocacy, and it aimed to address the climate change crisis facing the planet.  As many as 195  countries were represented in the negotiations that led to the landmark climate deal.  Indeed, it was only after  weeks of passionate debate that  international concurrence was reached in addressing the environmental challenges confronting the world, with particular attention to moving beyond fossil fuels and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

The success of the COP 21 summit in Paris and the emergence of the landmark Paris Agreement was, to some extent, attributed to the efforts of France's  Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius who presided over the negotiations.  The French foreign minister's experience and credentials as a seasoned diplomat and respected statesman paid dividends.  He skillfully guided the delegates from almost 200 countries and interest groups along the negotiations process, with ostensibly productive results and a reasonably robust deal to show for it.

On Dec. 12, 2015, French Foreign Minister Fabius officially adopted the agreement, declaring: "I now invite the COP to adopt the decision entitled Paris Agreement outlined in the document.  Looking out to the room I see that the reaction is positive, I see no objections. The Paris agreement is adopted."  Once Foreign Minister Fabius' gavel was struck, symbolically inaugurating the Paris Agreement into force, the COP delegate rushed to their feet with loud and bouyant cheers as well as thunderous applause.

In general, the Paris Agreement was being hailed as a victory for enviromental activists and a triumph for international diplomats, while at the same time being understood as simply an initial -- and imperfect -- move in the direction of a sustainable future.

China's chief negotiator, Xie Zhenhua, issued this  message, saying that while the accord was not ideal,  it should "not prevent us from marching historical steps forward."

United States President  Barack Obama lauded the deal as both "ambitious" and "historic,"  and the work of strenuous multilateral negotiations as he declared, "Together, we've shown what's possible when the world stands as one."  The United States leader acknowledged that the accord  was not "perfect," but he reminded the critics that it was "the best chance to save the one planet we have. "

Former United States Vice President Al Gore, one of the world's most well known environmental advocates, issued a lengthy statement on the accompishments ensconced in the Paris Agreement.  He highlighted the fact that the Paris Agreement was a first step towards a future with a reduced carbon footprint on Planet Earth as he said,  "The components of this agreement -- including a strong review mechanism to enhance existing commitments and a long-term goal to eliminate global-warming pollution this century -- are essential to unlocking the necessary investments in our future. No agreement is perfect, and this one must be strengthened over time, but groups across every sector of society will now begin to reduce dangerous carbon pollution through the framework of this agreement."

The central provisions of the Paris Agreement included the following items:

- Greenhouse gas emissions should peak as quickly as possible, with a move towards balancing energy sources, and ultimately the decrease of  greenhouse gases in the second half of this century
- Global temperature increase would be limited to 1.5 degrees Centigrade  above pre-industrial levels and would be held "well below" the  two degrees Centigrade threshold
-  Progress on these goals would be reviewed  every five years beginning in 2020 with new  greenhouse gas reduction targets issued every five years
- $100 billion would be expended each year in climate finance for developing countries to move forward with green technologies, with further climate financing to be advanced in the years beyond

It should be noted that there both  legally binding and voluntary elements contained within the Paris Agreement. Specifically, the  submission of an emissions reduction target and the regular review of that goal would be legally mandatory for all countries.  Stated differently, there would be a system in place by which  experts would be able to track the carbon-cutting progress of each country.  At the same time, the specific targets to be set by countries would be determined at the discretion of the countries, and would not be binding.  While there was some criticism over this non-binding element, the fact of the matter was that the imposition of emissions targets was believed to be a major factor in the failure of climate change talks in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 2009. 

In 2015, the talks faced challenges as several countries, such as China and India, objected to conditions that would stymie economic and development. In order to avoid that kind of landmine, a system Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) was developed and formed the basis of the accord. As such, the Paris Agreement would, in fact,  facilitate economic growth and development, as well as technological progress, but with the goal of long-term ecological sustainability based on low carbon  sources.  In fact, the agreement heralded as "the beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era."  As noted by Nick Mabey, the head of the climate diplomacy organization E3G, said, "Paris means governments will go further and faster to tackle climate change than ever before.  The transition to a low carbon economy is now unstoppable, ensuring the end of the fossil fuel age."

A particular sticking point in the agreement was the $100 billion earmarked for  climate financing for developing countries to transition from traditional fossil fuels to green energy technologies and a low carbon future.  In 2014, a report by the  International Energy Agency indicated that the cost of that transition would actually be around $44 trillion by the mid-century -- an amount that would render the $100 billion being promised to be a drop in the proverbial bucket.  However, the general expectation was that the Republican-controlled Senate in the United States, which would have to ratify the deal in that country, was not interested in contributing significant funds for the cause of climate change. 

A key strength of the Paris Agreement was the ubiquitous application of measures to all countries.  Of note was the frequently utilized concept of "flexibility" with regard to the Paris Agreement.  Specifically,  the varying capacities of the various countries in meeting their obligations would be anticipated and accorded flexibility.  This aspect presented something of a departure from the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which drew a sharp distinction between developed and developing countries, and mandated a different set of obligations for those categories of countries.  Thus, under Kyoto, China and India were not held to the same standards as the United States and European countries.

In the Paris Agreement, there would be commitments from all countries across the globe.

Another notable strength of the Paris Agreement was the fact that the countries of the world were finally able to reach consensus on the vital necessity to limit global temperature increases to 1.5 degrees Centrigrade.  Ahead of the global consensus on the deal, and as controversy continued to surface over the targeted global temperature limits, the leaders of island countries were sounding the alarm about the melting of the Polar ice caps and the associated rise in seal level.  Prime Minister

Enele Sopoaga of Tuvalu issued this dismal reminder: "Tuvalu's future … is already bleak and any further temperature increase will spell the total demise of Tuvalu. No leader in this room carries such a level of worry and responsibility. Just imagine you are in my shoes, what would you do?"  It was thus something of a victory for environmental advocates that the countries of the world could find cnsensus on the lower number -- 1.5 degrees rather than 2 degrees.

A  significant weak point with regard to the Paris deal was a "loss and damage" provision, which anticipates that even with all the new undertakings intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and move to a low carbon future, there would nonetheless be unavoidable climate change consequences.  Those consequences ranged from the loss of arable land for farmers as well as soil erosion and contamination of potable water by sea water, to the decimation of territory in coastal zones and on small islands, due to the rise in sea level, with entire small island countries being rendered entirely uninhabitable.  The reality was that peoples' homes across the world would be destroyed along with their way of life.

With that latter catastrophic effect being a clear and present danger for small island countries, the  Association of Small Island States (AOSIS) demanded that the developed world acknowledge its responsibility for this irreversible damage..

Despite the fact that greenhouse gas emissions and the ensuing plague of global warming was, indeed, the consequence of development in the West (the United States and Europe) and the large power house countries, such as Russia, China and India,  there was no appetite by those countries to sign on to unlimited liability.  Under the Paris Agreement,  there was a call for  research  on insurance mechanisms that would address loss and damage issues, with recommendations to come in the future.

The call for research was being regarded as an evasion of sorts and constituted the weakest aspect of the Paris Agreement.  Not surprisingly, a coalition of small island nations demanded a "Marshall Plan" for the Pacific.  Borrowing the term "Marshall Plan" from the post-World War II reconstruction effort, the coalition of Pacific island nation, which included Kiribati, Tuvalu, Fiji, and the Marshall Islands, called for an initiative that would include investment in renewable energy and shoreline protection,  cultural preservation, economic assistance for economies in transition, and a plan for migration and resettlement for these countries as they confront the catastrophic effects of the melting of the Polar ice caps and the concomitant rise in sea level.  The precise contours of the initiative remained unknown, unspecified, and a mere exercise in theory at the time of writing.  Yet such an initiative would, at some point, have to be addressed, given the realities of climate change and the slow motion calamity unfolding each day for low-lying island nations across the world.

As noted by Vice President Greg Stone of  Conservation International, who also functions as  an adviser to the government of Kiribati, "Imagine living in a place where you know it's going to go away someday, but you don't know what day that wave's going to come over and wash your home away."  He added, "It's a disaster we know is going to happen."

Meanwhile, the intervening years promised to be filled with hardship for small island nations, such as Kiribati.  Stone explained, "For every inch of sea-level rise, these islands lose 10 feet of their freshwater table to saltwater intrusion," Stone explained. "So it's not just about the day the water finally goes over the island; it's also about the day that there's just not enough water left and everyone has to move off the island."  Presaging the future for island nations that could face submersion, Stone said, "If you look ahead 50 years, a country like Kiribati could become the first aqueous nation. possibility of migration. That is, they own this big patch of ocean, and they administer it from elsewhere."

Foreign Minister Minister Tony Debrum of the Marshall Islands emerged as the champion advocating on behalf of small island nation states and a loose coalition of concerned countries from the Pacific to the Caribbean, but with support from the United States.  He addressed the comprehensive concerns of small island nations regarding the weaknesses of the deal, while simultaneously making clear that the Paris Agreement signified hope for the countries most at risk.  In a formal statement, Debrum declared: "We have made history today. Emissions targets are still way off track, but this agreement has the tools to ramp up ambition, and brings a spirit of hope that we can rise to this challenge. I can go back home to my people and say we now have a pathway to survival."  Debrum highlighted the imperatives of Pacific island nations, saying, "Our High Ambition Coalition was the lightning rod we needed to lift our sights and expectations for a strong agreement here in Paris. We were joined by countries representing more than half the world. We said loud and clear that a bare-bones, minimalist agreement would not fly. We instead demanded an agreement to mark a turning point in history, and the beginning of our journey to the post-carbon era."

Debrum of the Marshall Islands espoused the quintessential synopsis of the accord and its effects for those most likely to be affected by climate change as he noted, "Climate change won't stop overnight, and my country is not out of the firing line just yet, but today we all feel a little safer."
Special Note Affecting Pacific Island Nations:
The impact of climate change as grounds for asylum --

In March 2018, New Zealand became the first country in the world to recognize the deleterious impact of climate change as grounds for asylum.  

Neighboring island nation states in the Pacific Ocean were experiencing the effects of climate change as an existential crisis.  The rise of sea level, the erosion of coastlines, and loss of potable water and soil needed for survival was impacting the viability of Pacific countries such as the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Palau, among others.  Some countries were expected to be wiped off the map by the end of the century, generating entire nations of environmental refugees. 

Environmental refugees do not enjoy protections under international law as  the 1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees protects persons fleeing persecution, from war or violence and not environmental crisis.  Moreover, the people of environmentally affected countries often do not want to be classified as refugees anyway. 
Former President Anote Tong of Kiribati has emphasized that the people of his country, quite likely to be rendered geographically homeless within decades, wanted to "migrate with dignity."

Against this backdrop,  New Zealand -- led by its Labour Party government, backed by the Green Party --  became the first country in the world to recognize the deleterious impact of climate change as grounds for asylum.  Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced plans to create a special visa for Pacific Islanders rendered homeless and forced to relocate because of the rise of sea level.  The program would begin in a limited manner - with only 100 visas offered annually.  However, it would serve as a precedent of sorts, setting an example for other countries to follow and also offer assistance. 

As noted by former Prime Minister Helen Clark via Twitter, New Zealand already had in place "significant migrant quotas for citizens of its Pacific neighbours" as part of its good neighbor policy. The new visa program would build upon this foundation. 

At the international level, the move by New Zealand could encourage assistance by other countries irrespective of legal recognition of refugee status by the United nations, Moreover,  it is an extension of the

"Protection Agenda" which 109 countries endorsed in 2015, and which seeks to organize resources to help the people affected by catastrophic effects of climate change. 
Editor's Entry on Environmental Policy: 

The low-lying Pacific island nations of the world, including Kiribati, Tuvalu, the Marshall Islands, Fiji, among others, are  vulnerable to the threats posed by global warming and cimate change, derived from carbon emissions, and resulting in the rise in sea level.  Other island nations in the Caribbean, as well as poor countries with coastal zones, were also at particular risk of suffering the deleterious effects of climate change.

Political policy in these countries are often connected to ecological issues, which have over time morphed into an existential crisis of sorts.  Indeed,  ecological concerns and the climate crisis have  also been dominant themes with life and death consequences for the people of island nations in the Pacific.  Indeed, the very livelihoods of fishing and subsistence farming remain at risk as a result of ecological and environmental changes.

Yet even so, these countries are threatened by increasingly high storm surges, which could wipe out entire villages and contaminate water supplies.  Moreover, because these are low lying island nations, the sustained rise in sea level can potentially lead to the terrain of these countries being unihabitable at best, and submerged at worst.  Stated in plain terms, these countries are at severe risk of being obliterated from the map and their plight illuminates the emerging global challenge of environmental refugees.  In these manifold senses, climate change is the existential crisis of the contemporary era.

Since the time of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, there have been efforts aimed at extending the life of that agreement, with an eye on minimizing greenhouse gas emissions, and thus minimizing the effects of climate change.  Those endeavors have largely ended in failure, as exemplified by the unsuccessful Copenhagen talks in 2009 and the fruitless Doha talks in 2012 respectively.  The success of the COP 21 talks in France, with the adoption of the landmark Paris Agreement in 2015, was regarded as the first glimmer of hope.  Not only did the Paris Agreement signify the triumph of international diplomacy and global consensus, but it also marked the start of the end of the fossil fuel era, with the path forward toward a low carbon future reliant on greener technologies.  Most crucially, the Paris Agreement stood as the first significant response in recent times to the central challenge of climate change and its quotidian effects on the lives of real human beings across the world. 

Pandemic Note
The coronavirus pandemic in 2020 has severely affected the economies of most countries of the world. Both poor and middle class households have been affected, with devastating impact most obvously on countries with tourism and service sectors.
The remote location of island countries of the Pacific has provided some insulation from the worst of the  global COVID-19 pandemic. By closing borders early into the pandemic and implementing strict quarantine protocols, Pacific Islands have seen the lowest incidences of coronavirus. That being said, the small and sometimes inadequate health care systems in these countries leave them at grave risk should community outbreaks occur.
Adding to the challenges facing Pacific Islands countries is the reality that they are most subject to devastating climate change disasters.  As with their vulnerabilities to the global pandemic, they are likewise vulnerable to the real and present danger of climate change.
At the broader economic level, most of these small island nations have limited natural resources, associated limited economies, significant poverty, and are located far from major markets. They  are accordingly deleteriously affected by external shocks to the global marketplace.  As the old adage goes in regard to international economic downturns, when the developed world gets a cold, the developing world gets pneumonia.
Accordingly, the islands of the Pacific will see major challenges -- not just economic, but existential -- from 2020 and onward.
-- August 2020

Written by Dr. Denise Coleman, Editor in Chief, CountryWatch.com.

Full Bibliography listed in Appendix. Supplementary source: The World's Water by William Burns; the United Nations,  the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC).
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Journal Code: 1652

Subject: CHRONOLOGIES (90%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (90%); ISLANDS & REEFS (90%); NATURAL RESOURCES (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (90%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WOMEN (79%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); ELECTION LAW (78%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS (69%); MISCONDUCT (62%); TRUST ARRANGEMENTS (60%)

Industry: PHOSPHATE ROCK MINING (56%)

Geographic: TUVALU (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); JAPAN (79%)

Load-Date: March 22, 2021


End of Document







| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2021 LexisNexis 






Page 3 of 4Political Conditions Tuvalu


 


 

