
CLIMATE CHANGE: READING THE LEAVES; NORTHEAST FORESTS FACING SLOW ALTERATION OF SPECIES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
March 12, 2018 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1
Length: 1819 words
Byline: Matt Markey, Block News Alliance
Body


BENEDICTA, Maine - An autumn drive through the rugged forests of New England and eastern Canada presents a convincing case that this is the place where postcard images are made. The vast stands of brilliant maples, gilded aspens and papery-barked birches create a striking contrast with the ribbons of deep green hues found in the concentrations of spruces and firs.
To the casual observer, with the northern hardwood forests and the ever-present conifers, Mother Nature has created an unmatched mosaic that likely has been associated with this region of North America for eons prior to European settlement of the continent.
Looking deeper, biologists see red flags and hear the clanging of alarm bells.
"When I see that forest, I see change," said Justin Richardson, a biogeochemist and assistant professor in the University of Massachusetts Department of Geosciences. "No forest is ever stagnant, and there are always new species moving in and old species moving out, but those changes normally take tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of years to take place."
Mr. Richardson, who conducted extensive research on the changing climate and its impact on the forests of the region as part of his doctoral work in Dartmouth College's Department of Earth Sciences, led a 2016 study that concluded climate change is prompting a makeover of the forests of greater New England.
"What we're seeing now is a much more rapid change," Mr. Richardson said. "We believe a shift is clearly taking place, from coniferous to more deciduous vegetation."
The forests of the Maritime provinces of eastern Canada and New England have undergone changes in the past. Large areas were cleared to make way for agricultural use more than a century ago, but the forests regenerated when much of the farming moved westward, where the terrain and weather conditions were better suited for raising crops.
Today, the New England-Acadian woodlands are a mixture of the hardwood forests and coniferous stands, with loose boundaries between the two. Biologists say that, historically, the hardwoods have been the more dominant species in more temperate climate areas, with conifers dominating in the more alpine regions.
"But a changing climate will push certain trees out of the New England region," Mr. Richardson said.
His study concluded that certain climate scenarios project that the stands of coniferous trees in that part of the country will lose 70 to 100 percent of their current range to deciduous trees by 2085 because of increased temperature and precipitation, as well as changes in timber harvesting.
Andrew Friedland, a professor in Dartmouth's Environmental Studies Program who was the senior author of the study report, concluded that the changes will not only impact the forests.
"As significant alterations to ecosystems resulting from global change become more likely, environmental scientists and the general public need to appreciate some of the potential outcomes," Mr. Friedland said in the report.
Besides the accompanying impact on the many birds and mammals that utilize this diverse forest habitat, Mr. Richardson said, the climate-related change in the forest will likely alter the way the trees in the region cycle nutrients and store toxic metals in their underlying soil, since coniferous trees hold these materials in the ground for longer periods of time.
"Deciduous trees have very different ecological and physical characteristics than conifers, and, based upon our findings, we conclude that a shift from coniferous to deciduous vegetation could decrease the accumulation and retention of major metals," he said.
"Looking at the retention of lead in forest soils, from all the lead from gasoline that we burned, forest floors are a sponge for that, but as temperature rises, those materials will leach out. We also expect to have mercury leaching out into the soil, the groundwater and the surface water, with potentially significant ramifications."
Keith Ramos, manager of the Moosehorn National Wildlife Refuge in Maine, shares the concerns about what domino effect climate change might have on the forests and wildlife in the sprawling refuge complexes under his care.
"These are very complex ecosystems that come with a wide range of challenges already, and as we work to protect critically important habitat and properly manage this vast forest, climate change and its impact bring on a whole new set of issues," he said. "We have to be vigilant and be ready to address new challenges that will undoubtedly come up as a result of climate change." Rapid impacts
Some studies predict that the transformation of these northern forests could take place at an extremely rapid pace because of increases in mean temperatures and precipitation in the region brought on by climate change.
Daniel Horton, an assistant professor in the Climate Change Research Group of the Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences at Northwestern University, said that while the changes taking place in our forests because of climate change might not be nearly as noticeable as an eroding coastline that threatens to dump dwellings into the sea, the transformations are nonetheless significant.
"Many facets of climate change directly and indirectly influence forests and forest health," he said. "Increasing temperatures may extend the growing season, shifting pollination and leafing cycles, and potentially exposing trees to more pests and/or pests that are typically only tolerant of warmer climates."
Mr. Horton said one of the many potential results of changes in our forests brought on by fluctuations in the climate could be a spike in the number and severity of wildfires, something more often associated with the American West.
"Altered precipitation patterns, in particular changes in the frequency and or the severity of drought, may also pose risks for forests," he said. "Increased evaporation due to warmer air temperatures will lead to the desiccation of forests and their underlying soils and will likely lead to an increase in wildfire risk - a climate change impact that California is dealing with now."
Charles Bourque, a University of New Brunswick forestry professor, has stated that if greenhouse gas emissions are not reduced, species such as balsam fir and black spruce could be gone from the region in less than 100 years.
"The tree species that require lower temperatures, they will tend to be eradicated from the province of New Brunswick," Mr. Bourque told CBC News.
Studies done by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency have concluded that the climate in the northeastern corner of the United States is going through significant change, and the pace is expected to increase in the coming years. The study found that between 1895 and 2011, the average temperatures in the region spiked nearly two degrees Fahrenheit, and projections expect to see that increase jump as high as 10 degrees Fahrenheit in less than 70 years.
The EPA study also revealed that between 1958 and 2012, the Northeastern states experienced an increase of more than 70 percent in the number of major rainfall events. That was the highest such acceleration in any region of the United States.
The report also cited the potential loss of economically important tree species such as sugar maple as it moves north into Canada, where its preferred climate would be more common. Biologists with the EPA also predict that warmer temperatures will provide a robust environment for outbreaks of pests and pathogens that threaten forest species.
Lyme disease, already on the rise according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, could continue to increase, said Maria Janowiak, the deputy director of the U.S. Forest Service Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science.
"Right now, the biggest concerns for people are the increases in extreme weather events and how those affect road access and also safety," she said. "But there are a number of other ways that forest changes might impact people - the expansion of Lyme disease and other insect-borne pathogens, since these all interact with warmer temperatures, and create an increased risk to human health."
Ms. Janowiak said that with forests, the manifestation of climate change is not nearly as dramatic as a wall of ice from a calving glacier crashing into the ocean, but it is definitely taking place.
"Over the long term, we expect to see large changes in the composition of forests, but since forests are long-lived, these changes take a long time to play out," she said. "It can be difficult to see changes in forests in real time."
Ms. Janowiak added that climate-produced changes in the forests will also have an impact on the wildlife that use that habitat.
"There is definitely a lot of interaction, so with wildlife, it's hard to know exactly what will happen, since some species will be worse off, and some might do better in a warmer environment," she said. "Certain species associated with those northern forests, such as the Canada lynx and moose, will be negatively affected by climate change." Wildlife changes
The National Wildlife Federation, in its report titled "Game Changers: Climate Impacts to America's Hunting, Fishing and Wildlife Heritage," lists waterfowl and trout as two more likely victims of significant climate change to these forests. The organization states that the northern evergreen forests, primary duck habitat, are being altered by increased fire and pine bark beetle epidemics that result from the more variable climate. Trout become collateral damage since they require the coolest waterways in those forests, and rising air temperatures rob the oxygen from the streams.
Author and birding expert Kenn Kaufman said studies by the U.S. Geological Survey show that several species that rely on spruce and other conifers have been declining in the region, while the same New England region has seen increases in species that prefer a deciduous or mixed forest.
"It's clear that the spruce-loving warblers have declined in New England and the Maritimes," Mr. Kaufman said, while adding that their numbers could be increasing in the more northern reaches of their range. "The decrease in spruce-loving warblers in the Northeast is reason for concern, but not necessarily reason for alarm."
Mr. Richardson said that as warmer and wetter conditions become more prevalent in the forests of the northeastern United States and eastern Canada, many changes in the composition of those forests, and the impact on the surrounding region, will play out. Trees that prefer warmer and wetter conditions will migrate northward.
"As the climate warms, we expect to see some of the iconic species of New England, like maples and beeches, pushed out. Those will no longer be there," he said. "We are going to see things we never even thought of - we'll see a shift in the face of the forests of New England. You can't change one thing, and expect nothing else to change along with it."

Notes

Block News Alliance consists of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and The Blade of Toledo, Ohio. Matt Markey is the outdoors editor for The Blade. He can be reached mmarkey@theblade.com or 419-724-6068. / This is the last of three parts. {SERIES} CLIMATE CHANGE: A THREE-PART LOOK AT HOW FORESTS, FISHERIES, AND THE LIVES OF PEOPLE ARE BEING TRANSFORMED BY A WARMING CLIMATE

Graphic

 
PHOTO: From left: Maria Janowiak, deputy director for the Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science, U.S. Forest Service Northern Research Station; Justin Richardson, soil biochemist and doctoral candidate at Dartmouth's department of Earth sciences; and Daniel Horton, who leads the Climate Change Research Group at Northwestern University. \ \ INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: U.S. Forest Service; The Blade: THE CHANGING FOREST
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (90%); MEDICAL SCIENCE (90%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (90%); BIOLOGY (89%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH (78%); TIMBER TRACT OPERATIONS (78%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (77%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (77%); WEATHER (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); WRITERS (73%); GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS (72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (72%)

Organization: FOREST SERVICE (84%); DARTMOUTH COLLEGE (82%); NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY (59%); UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS (56%)

Industry: FORESTRY & LOGGING (78%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (78%); TIMBER TRACT OPERATIONS (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); WRITERS (73%)

Geographic: NORTHEAST USA (93%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (79%); MAINE, USA (58%); CANADA (92%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: March 16, 2018


End of Document


ENVISIONING THE POSSIBLE FUTURE OF CLIMATE CHANGE; RECENT HISTORY MAKES PITTSBURGH A GRITTY EXAMPLE OF THE CHANGES REQUIRED TO COMBAT GLOBAL WARMING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 22, 2009 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: BUSINESS; THE PITTSBURGH SUMMIT 2009 A SPECIAL BUSINESS REPORT BY THE PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE\; Pg. E-12
Length: 2788 words
Byline: Don Hopey, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


The irony of lunch-bucket-turned-high-tech Pittsburgh hosting a global financial summit scheduled to tackle the daunting challenge of paying for a less carbon intensive energy future is rich on so many levels.
Perhaps nowhere in the world have industrial emissions been reduced and the skies cleared so much as in Pittsburgh, where the G-20 finance ministers will gather Thursday and Friday.
But know, too, that because carbon dioxide -- unlike some other greenhouse gases -- stays in the atmosphere so long, a component of the climate change problem billowed from Henry Clay Frick's coke ovens and Andrew Carnegie's steel mills.
The region's transformative changes during the last 50 years did not come easily or cheaply in either human or financial terms. And the changes that will be required to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and address climate change on a global scale over the next 50 years promise to be even greater.
Maybe the Pittsburgh setting will provide context for taking the bold action that a scientific consensus says is necessary now. Certainly the region's rich environmental history gives leaders of current greening efforts a unique perspective on what can and should be done to make the massive and expensive transitions needed to address climate change.
Here are some thoughts about what they envision as the important next steps needed to address climate change locally, nationally or internationally:
Teresa Heinz, chair, Heinz Endowments, Heinz Family Philanthropies, said Pittsburgh is the perfect G-20 host city because the promises and realities of cooperatively embarking on a green, sustainable recovery will be all around them.
"One of the best ways we can address the threats of global climate change is to expand the innovation we've seen here across the country, investing in green technology, alternative energy and green chemistry that will create jobs, strengthen our infrastructure and power our nation through domestic sources that can develop right here at home. It's an optimistic reality that proves it's not a choice between the environment or jobs. Quite the contrary, the environment is jobs.
"For our efforts to combat climate change to be truly successful, however, we will need to forge binding agreements between regions, states and countries that control harmful emissions and hold each other to account as one region's activities and efforts now directly impact, or undermine, another's.
"Pittsburgh, even on its best days, has trouble with air quality compliance, not because of its own doing, but because of what its neighbors are doing. Pittsburgh stands as a powerful example of what we're all capable of and I hope the G-20 leaders can take something valuable home from our experience."
Jared L. Cohon, Carnegie Mellon University president, said Pittsburgh should make research and development of clean coal technologies the highest priority because despite its emissions problems the world will continue to rely on it while alternative energy sources are developed.
"If we, as a major center of coal production, want coal to be part of the longterm fuel mix for electricity generation, and if we care about the interim impacts, we must have a sense of urgency about developing ways to capture and store carbon generated from coal. Carnegie Mellon scientists and engineers are working on just these issues in collaboration with colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh, West Virginia University and the National Energy Technology Laboratory.
"With this kind of cooperative effort expanded in scope and participants, Pittsburgh and our region can make a very important contribution to reducing coal's impact on climate and the environment."
"For too long, the world has played a game of, 'I'll limit my emissions of carbon dioxide, if you'll limit yours.' It is time to lead by example and get the rest of the world to follow -- either because they get embarrassed or because we won't trade with them again until they do."
Kathleen McGinty, former state Department of Environmental Protection secretary, environmental official in the Clinton administration and advisor with Pittsburgh solar technology firm Plextronics Inc., said tackling climate change will take a mix of old and new technologies plus the old-fashioned work ethic Pittsburgh is known for.
"Solving the climate crisis isn't about some wondrous new technology or impossible to imagine inventions. It is about building and installing efficient boilers and ballasts and buildings. It is about bolting solar panels on roofs and hanging them on street lamps and utility poles. It is about steel towers in the ground with wind turbines on top. It is about cars charged with the new "lead carbon" super-batteries being made right here at home, right now. And it is about capturing carbon from our coal plants and using it to enrich the soil, even as we stop it from polluting the air.
"In other words, winning the battle against climate change is about the very things that the people of Pittsburgh are very good at and where the Pittsburgh area is second to none: Pittsburgh has abundant raw energy resources. Pittsburgh has the basic industries and the skill sets needed in steel and glass and aluminum. Pittsburgh has more green buildings than nearly any city in the country. And the region is now home to some of the most promising solar, wind, biofuel, clean coal, battery and efficient window companies anywhere. When it comes to solving the climate crisis, the people of Pittsburgh have all the right stuff."
Larry Schweiger, president of the National Wildlife Federation, former executive director of the Western Pennsylvania Conservancy and author of a new book, "Last Chance," about the impact of climate changes on life and wildlife on Earth, said the G-20 must provide focus to a world on the edge of catastrophic climate change.
"First, I hope they reach a collective commitment on strong reduction targets for carbon dioxide proportional to their emissions. I think that type of commitment will be much easier to get with 20 nations in the room than at Copenhagen where there will be 100 nations.
"Second, we need to make available technology to help developing nations adapt to changes in sea level, storms, desertification and displaced populations that climate change will cause, helping them skip over old 20th century technologies in favor of better environmental technologies, including solar. And third we need to help make on the ground adaptations to protect people, including moving them back from oceans and waterways, before there is a crisis situation.
"The U.S. needs to do more because it caused much of the problem. We cannot walk away from that responsibility because it will not put us in the right place."
M. Granger Morgan, head of the Department of Engineering and Public Policy at Carnegie Mellon University where he directs the Center for Climate Decision Making, said local research leadership can translate into job and economic benefits if leaders act boldly.
"To stop climate change, by mid-century the world must reduce its emissions roughly 80 percent. Doing that's going to take everything we've got: more efficient use of energy, coal plants that capture their carbon dioxide and safely put it a mile underground, more wind and nuclear plants, and plug-electric hybrid vehicles that get their power from the U.S., not the Middle East.
"Pittsburgh has a great start on most of these activities. We have many new energy efficient green buildings -- but we need to figure out how to make our older buildings, and the appliances in them, use less energy.
"Our National Energy Technology Lab, located in the South Hills, leads the world in research on carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) -- but we need to build some CCS plants here. We have several wind farms just to our east but we need more, and our universities need to come up with affordable ways to add large amounts of variable wind into out power system without causing blackouts.
"Westinghouse Electric, in our eastern suburbs, is building safe and modern nuclear power plants all over the world. We need to build some here.
"Toyota is supporting research at Carnegie Mellon on hybrid cars, including cars that drive most of the time on electricity. We need to replace more of our gas guzzling clunkers with cars like the Prius. In about a year, Chevrolet will release the Volt, its new plug hybrid. Pittsburgh's Chevy dealers should start planning now to make our region the sales leader in the nation.
"There are no "silver bullets" -- no single technology or strategy that will solve the problem of climate change. Meeting that challenge will take everything we've got -- and in the process create many new jobs.
"If we lead, the rest of the world will follow. If we sit on our hands and wait for others, our grandchildren will not thank us!"
Matthew Mehalik, Sustainable Pittsburgh program manager, said climate change is a complex issue that the region's Business Climate Coalition is working on from a sustainable perspective that does not disadvantage local industries.
"We want to be on the right side of history when we approach climate change and we have to factor climate issues into our regional planning process. But it's complex. The cost of transitioning away from fossil fuels is great but we can't continue to rely on coal. On the other hand, we need to take advantage of our wealth. I have the feeling that the G-20 may try to reduce a complex situation to good guys and bad guys, but these companies recognize they need to start changing their business model.
"There is also a need to keep shining a light on business operations to motivate change."
Joel A. Tarr, the Caliguiri University Professor of History and Policy at Carnegie Mellon University and author of "Devastation and Renewal," an environmental history of Pittsburgh and its region, said leadership and some calculated risk taking is needed and, if history is any guide, change won't come easily.
"Pittsburgh has accomplished major environmental improvements in the past half-century but does this history provide any clues to strategies that might be followed in order to achieve future goals? Critical to their accomplishment was political and private leadership willing to take risks, unafraid of challenging powerful vested interests, and allied with citizens groups.
"This leadership must be willing to challenge the status quo and to educate the public to their real interests in regard to health and the environment in order to achieve significant environmental goals."
Patricia M. DeMarco, Rachel Carson Homestead Association executive director, said climate change solutions must be found in how we produce energy and also in how we limit its use.
"We waste two thirds of the fuel we burn through inefficiencies in the conversion process, and inefficiencies at the point of use. We need to re-think our approach to using energy to perform necessary work. Finding least energy use solutions for space conditioning in buildings, moving people, and goods, communications, and industrial processes has received very little applied research attention.
"The most important way Pittsburgh can contribute to climate change remedies is to apply the significant concentration of academic and industrial capability to the problem of reducing the use of fossil fuels through demand improvements. Distributed power based on renewable resources, building designs that require almost no externally supplied energy, community designs around mass transit and pedestrian convenience all can dramatically reduce our fossil fuel use.
"The benefits of moving to a post-fossil fuel economy include the potential for large health improvements. One in four Americans suffer from asthma and chronic allergies, one in 150 children are born with autism syndrome. Both have been linked to particulate and chemical contaminant emissions from fossil fuel combustion in vehicles and power plants. We need to count the health cost of fossil fuel extraction and combustion in the avoided cost for converting to renewable and sustainable energy systems."
"Rachel Carson's environmental ethic provides four principles to guide our path to a sustainable future: live in harmony with nature; preserve and learn from natural places; minimize the impact of synthetic chemicals on the natural systems of the world; and consider the implications of human actions on the global web of life.
"We have issued a Rachel Carson Legacy Challenge asking people, institutions, governments and businesses to make permanent, measurable changes in their lifestyle consistent with Rachel Carson's principles. We ask everyone to take at least one specific step to move toward a more responsible and less wasteful pattern of resource consumption.
"Overcoming the inertia to change is difficult. Once we begin to move together toward a pattern of sustainability and a value system that seeks to use a minimum of resources for all of our needs, each subsequent step becomes easier.
John Hanger, DEP secretary and former president and chief executive officer of Citizens for Pennsylvania's Future, said Pennsylvania, which emits about 1 percent of the world's heat-trapping gases, has a big role as the climate change drama plays out.
"Though our economy has grown greatly since 1960 and we have added more than 1 million people to our population, our emissions have not increased much at all over the last 50 years. Why? Cars today get about twice as many miles per gallon as those on the road 50 years ago. New appliances and buildings today are much more energy efficient than 50 years ago. About a half of our electricity generation now comes from zero carbon technologies like nuclear, wind, solar, biomass, as well as natural gas that emits less carbon than other fossil fuels when 50 years ago all of our electricity came from burning coal and oil.
"To continue this progress, we must use both law and markets. Laws like building codes and vehicle mileage standards must boost energy efficiency as well as low-carbon fuels and electricity; competitive markets must operate to produce efficiently cleaner appliances, electricity, vehicles; and public-private partnerships must develop new and better technologies like carbon capture and storage for coal plants."
Scott Van de Mark, director of special projects for the Pennsylvania Environmental Council, is working with Allegheny County to help reduce its global warming emissions footprint.
"From a local and regional standpoint, the most cost-effective and direct way for homeowners, businesses and governments to reduce their carbon footprint is to improve the energy efficiency of our homes, businesses and government buildings. With an older building stock in a colder climate in the Pittsburgh region, there are multiple opportunities to retrofit buildings and reduce energy usage and cost by upgrading insulation, replacing light bulbs or choosing to construct new facilities or renovate existing facilities in accordance with the LEED green building certification program.
"The Pennsylvania Environmental Council is honored to be assisting Allegheny County with the development of a greenhouse gas emissions inventory for county-owned and operated facilities and vehicle fleets. The inventory will be followed by a set of recommended actions for the county to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions including several cost-effective actions to improve the efficiency of heating, cooling and lighting county facilities. This effort follows and benefits from the City of Pittsburgh Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory issued in 2006 and the Pittsburgh Climate Action Plan issued in 2008."
Devra L. Davis, former director of the Center for Environmental Oncology at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, professor of epidemiology at Pitt's Graduate School of Public Health and author of many books, including "When Smoke Ran Like Water," an account of the 1948 Donora disaster, said Pittsburgh has transformed itself and the world can, too.
"Once one of the most polluted zones on the planet, the Pittsburgh region has turned its former moniker as 'hell with the lid off' into a force synonymous with major environmental awareness and green policy. . .
"Like the steel and coke produced in massive quantities for the first half of the last century and like the hard-charging athletes who are regularly cheered on by legions of die-hard fans, the town still has a tough edge to it.
"But, today the kind folks of this great region are steeped in the promise of the future, justly proud of the symphony and other major artistic accomplishments, and still struggling with the need to balance the freedom to study a problem with the duty to do something about it."

Notes

THE G-20 SUMMIT / Don Hopey can be reached at dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. /

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Teresa Heinz
PHOTO: Jared L. Cohon
PHOTO: Kathleen McGinty
PHOTO: Larry Schweiger
PHOTO: M. Granger Morgan
PHOTO: Matthew Mehalik
PHOTO: Joel A. Tarr
PHOTO: Patricia M. DeMarco
PHOTO: John Hanger
PHOTO: Scott Van de Mark
PHOTO: Devra L. Davis
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY (89%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (89%); SUSTAINABILITY (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); CHEMISTRY (77%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (77%); INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION (77%); INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (77%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (72%); CHARITIES (72%); CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY (72%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); GREEN CHEMISTRY (66%); AGREEMENTS (64%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (64%); FOUNDATIONS (64%); PHILANTHROPY (64%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (61%); JOB CREATION (61%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (77%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (77%); PUBLISHING (74%); CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY (72%); GREEN CHEMISTRY (66%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (64%); IRON & STEEL MILLS (54%); COAL INDUSTRY (50%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (94%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (91%)

Load-Date: September 22, 2009


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE AND SANDY: A COMPLEX CONNECTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 26, 2012 Monday
PITTSBURGH PRESS EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; IN DEPTH; Pg. A-10
Length: 1140 words
Byline: Jason Samenow, The Washington Post
Body


The complex connection between climate change and Superstorm Sandy
When it comes to climate change and its effect on Superstorm Sandy, it seems that the loudest voices fall into two camps:
-- The all-in camp: Climate change is making the weather more extreme. Sandy is the poster child for that and a sign of things to come.
-- The no-effect camp: Climate change played no role in Sandy, and there's no cause for concern about the future.
The inconvenient truth falls in the middle. Considering hurricane history, a careful read of peer-reviewed literature on hurricanes and climate change, and the views of a range of scientists, the following five ideas best capture current understanding of the role of climate change on Superstorm Sandy:
-- Climate change did not cause Sandy.
Climate change does not cause storms; storms form when certain weather ingredients come together. History shows that violent storms have struck the Northeast repeatedly.
In the tropics, the formation of hurricanes requires rising air (from converging winds), heat and moisture. These ingredients led to the genesis of Sandy just as they have led to the formation of many storms in the tropics year after year.
In the 1950s, several hurricanes made landfall along the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast coast. Hazel, which made landfall in the Carolinas as a Category 4 hurricane, was arguably more intense than Sandy, producing wind gusts of more than 90 mph from South Carolina to New York state.
What made Sandy unusual was its interaction with an extratropical low pressure system along the East Coast and its transformation into a "hybrid" storm. But Martin Hoerling, a NOAA meteorologist, disputes the idea that climate change had anything to do with this. "In this case, the immediate cause is most likely little more that the coincidental alignment of a tropical storm with an extratropical storm," he told The New York Times.
-- Climate change may have injected Sandy with more energy and power.
It's well established that, all other things being equal, warm ocean water energizes hurricanes. The warmer the water, the more intense a hurricane can become. According to Texas Tech atmospheric science professor Katherine Hayhoe, elevated ocean temperatures in the Atlantic might have given Sandy some extra fuel. "October surface ocean temperatures have warmed by two degrees over the last hundred years," Ms. Hayhoe told NPR. "So when any given hurricane comes along, on average there's warmer water than there would have been otherwise," she noted, "which gives it more energy, and gives it more strength."
-- Sea-level rise from man-made climate change increased the water level along the Northeast coast.
Sea levels have risen around 10 to 15 inches over the last 100 years along the East Coast. About half of that rise is from natural causes (sinking land); the other half can be reasonably attributed to man-made warming. So, one could say climate change added six to eight inches to Sandy's storm surge, worsening flooding.
Still, there's little agreement on the significance of this additional water. Chip Knappenburger, a climatologist affiliated with the Cato Institute, has said that "the overwhelming majority of the damage done by the storm surge would have happened anyway."
Chris Mooney, author of "The Republican War on Science," said that the extra water "matters a lot," and pointed to climate scientist Scott Mandia's estimate that 6,000 more people were impacted for each additional inch of sea-level rise.
Sea levels are projected to continue rising as the Earth warms, raising the maximum water level when hurricanes come ashore and the potential for flooding.
-- Decreased Arctic sea ice from climate change may have altered steering currents, helping to push Sandy ashore.
This idea is controversial. As Sandy paralleled the mid-Atlantic coast, well offshore, it suddenly ran into a roadblock -- a strong high pressure system in the North Atlantic -- and made a sharp left toward the New Jersey shore. Some researchers speculate that the strength of this roadblock was a consequence of record-low Arctic sea ice, which is linked to climate change.
The theory goes like this: Less Arctic sea ice reduces temperature contrasts at high latitudes and the strength of westerly winds that serve as the atmosphere's steering current. As a result, the atmosphere's flow slows down and bigger blocks develop.
Rutgers University climate researcher Jennifer Francis, who has published research supporting this theory, told New Jersey's Star-Ledger that she "absolutely" thinks Arctic sea ice played a role in Sandy's track. "The block was what scared ?Sandy? into the west," Ms. Francis said. "It's a very, very unusual pattern for a hurricane to take."
But some prominent climate scientists are skeptical about this theory. "I don't believe it," University Center for Atmospheric Research scientist Kevin Trenberth told The New York Times. The "null hypothesis has to be that this is just 'weather' and natural variability," he said.
-- Climate change is likely to slowly increase the intensity of hurricanes in the future.
After a hurricane, you often hear experts say something to the effect of "Climate change is increasing the odds of these kinds of events." It's not that simple.
Yes, scientists project gradual increases in hurricane intensity, with heavier rainfall and stronger peak winds. But with the exception of the most intense storms, hurricane frequency is projected to decline.
A clear human influence on hurricane activity may take decades to reveal itself. Although observed warming may be infusing storms with more power, it remains a challenge to quantify the human connection. NOAA hurricane and climate change researcher Tom Knutson put it this way: "It is premature to conclude that human activities - and particularly greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming - have already had a detectable impact on Atlantic hurricane activity."
In a commentary in Foreign Policy magazine, MIT professor of atmospheric science Kerry Emanuel stresses that establishing a causal connection between climate change and storms such as Sandy is not needed as a basis for action. The risks inherent in toying with the atmosphere and the possible consequences, Mr. Emanuel says, are reason enough to stop "keep kicking the climate can down the road."
"The argument that there is no risk or that we should do nothing is both scientifically and morally indefensible," Mr. Emanuel writes.
Indeed, there is a great deal of evidence that man-made climate change is real and poses risks to society and the environment, especially if its pace accelerates. Stronger hurricanes are just one of many possible unwelcome consequences. There's really no need to oversell connections between storms such as Sandy and global warming to build a case for responding to these risks.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Gerry Broome/Associated Press: Waves from superstorm Sandy crash onto the damaged Avalon Pier Oct. 29 in Kill Devil Hills, N.C.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: HURRICANE SANDY (92%); HURRICANES (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); MEDICAL SCIENCE (90%); WEATHER (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); METEOROLOGY (89%); TROPICAL STORMS (89%); OCEANS (84%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (78%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (78%)

Industry: PUBLISHING (74%)

Person: KATHARINE HAYHOE (79%)

Geographic: NORTHEAST USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

Load-Date: November 28, 2012


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE INFORMATION SCARCE IN SOME AREA SCIENCE INSTITUTIONS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 2, 2014 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1
Length: 1346 words
Byline: Chris Potter, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Visitors to Pittsburgh science-education facilities can experience an earthquake, look down the gullet of a tyrannosaurus rex and wander through a distant rain forest.
But learning about climate change - which scientists warn poses a serious global threat - may take a bit more imagination.
The Carnegie Science Center's exhibits make no mention of climate change. The Carnegie Museum of Natural History's 1983 "Polar World" exhibit says nothing about how ice is shifting beneath the feet of its Arctic denizens.
Even the city's premier greenhouse, Phipps Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, doesn't specifically discuss the greenhouse effect, though it foregrounds sustainability issues.
It's not that staffers doubt the threat.
"In the scientific community, there isn't a lot of debate about climate change," said Jason Brown, the Science Center's director of science and education. Just last month, NASA announced the previous half-year period had been the hottest on record.
National Aviary exhibits do refer to climate change, as does the polar bear habitat at the Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium. The Carnegie facilities address the topic in educational programs, and its natural history museum briefly mentions climate change in an Everglades diorama and a gallery on human population impacts. And at Phipps, executive director Richard Piacentini noted, ventures like the green-friendly Center for Sustainable Landscapes are "focused on addressing the root causes" of climate change.
Still, museum professionals cite several obstacles to raising the issue on the exhibit floor. Assembling exhibits can take years, and climate science is complicated and controversial, thanks largely to conservative political opposition. "The politicization of the issue is one of the biggest challenges," Mr. Brown said.
Museums must weigh objections from audiences and - some observers say - funders too. But Penn State University meteorology professor Michael Mann, a leading climate-change expert, said exhibits must address the issue: "They are perhaps the greatest source of informal education the public receives about science and nature."
Lighting visitors' fire
When the Pittsburgh Zoo opened its polar bear exhibit in 2006, it made bears "the poster child for climate change," said education director Margie Marks. Melting polar ice threatens the bears' survival, so the zoo incorporated global warming concerns in "Water's Edge," a facsimile Arctic outpost adjoining the habitat.
There, a poster display warns that "burning fossil fuels such as oil and coal sends . greenhouse gases into our atmosphere." It identifies "green" energy sources like solar and wind along with ethanol, natural gas and "clean coal technology." A "1 Degree of Change" handout suggests ways to reduce carbon emissions, like turning off lights and using public transit.
The message of the "1 Degree" campaign, which includes a website and other outreach, is that "If we change our daily behavior by a couple degrees, that can have a big impact," said Ms. Marks. "People want to do the right thing when they find out how easy it is."
Museum professionals say encouraging action helps ward off despair about the problem, and science facilities often practice what they preach. The zoo, for one, features solar and wind power near its entrance.
But while Mr. Mann, of Penn State, agreed "individual actions are important," he said large-scale solutions, like taxing carbon emissions, are needed to avert global disaster.
Mr. Mann gave the zoo display "a solid B+," but noted an ongoing debate over energy sources like ethanol, clean coal and natural gas. Because those are, or rely on, fossil fuels, he said, "Some of their solutions may not be solutions at all."
Ms. Marks said the zoo "felt we had to have a mixture" of energy sources.
"We're in the coal belt," she added, "so for us to think coal is going away is probably not going to happen."
Chilling the debate?
In fact, the "1 Degree" campaign is sponsored by EQT, a Pittsburgh natural-gas company whose logo appears on the handout. An older version of the pamphlet urged visitors to support politicians who back renewable energy and "the reduction of CO2 emissions." That recommendation is missing from the EQT-branded handout, though zoo spokesperson Tracy Gray said EQT "didn't have anything to do with" the revamped handout.
But ties to energy companies can fuel criticism. "It's wrong for museums that celebrate science and nature to have relationships with the fossil-fuel industry," said Beka Economopoulos, a New York-based activist whose work challenges the way museums discuss climate issues.
"There's a chill that happens, subconsciously, where you don't want to critique the practices of donors," Ms. Economopoulos said. And extracting fossil fuels causes "environmental devastation. So why are you providing them a clean image?"
Such ties aren't uncommon. The Carnegie Science Center has a science-education partnership with Chevron, an important player in Pennsylvania's natural-gas industry. A Chevron public affairs executive, Trip Oliver, was named to the Science Center's board in June.
"Chevron is proud to partner with the Carnegie Science Center to inspire kids," said Mr. Oliver in an email response to questions about corporate sponsorship.
"I can't think of a person within these walls who would compromise their integrity for a sponsorship," said the Science Center's Mr. Brown.
The fact that Chevron is the largest corporate sponsor at California's Chabot Space and Science Center "wasn't a problem" when the center launched a climate-change exhibit, said its CEO, Alexander Zwissler.
Some institutions may feel constrained by funding concerns, Mr. Zwissler said. But "I wouldn't be so quick to judge them. We live in the real world. We're all using fossil fuels."
Warming to the subject
The Science Center offers educational programming on climate change, including the school program "Captain Green's Time Machine." Program production coordinator Mike Hennessy said, "We've gone the live-demonstration route because it's such a complex topic," and benefits from give-and-take with experts.
The Carnegie Museum of Natural History, meanwhile, has hosted "Climate Change Playground" events with environmental groups, informing visitors about climate change and how to take action on it.
"It can take a long time for museum exhibits to change," said assistant director of education Laurie Giarratani. "Going out into the community is faster."
Becca Shreckengast, the museum's director of exhibition experience, plans to update displays like "Polar World" with climate-change messages. The topic will also arise in new exhibits: An upcoming mollusk exhibit, for one, will note the museum's research on how climate change affects snails.
The Carnegie had planned to address climate change in an exhibit called "Earth, Energy and the Environment." The exhibit is currently shelved, partly due to changes in museum leadership. But Ms. Shreckengast said it will give viewers - including those who disbelieve climate science - a chance to provide input on the subject.
"Otherwise it just becomes a wall of noise," she said.
But climate-change exhibits don't always provoke anger.
Last year, the National Aviary unveiled "Canary's Call," an exhibit dedicated to environmental concerns. It features photographs of birds, environmental despoliation and text describing climate change and other threats. "Birds and other wildlife pay the price for our consumption of goods and our reliance on chemicals and fossil fuels," says one panel.
"These topics have a lot of emotion," said Aviary education director Patricia O'Neill. But the exhibit informs visitors about actions they can take. "When you provide information in a preachy way, people walk away feeling as if they can't act on it," she said.
So far, she said, there's been no outcry over the climate message. In fact, Aviary staff worried more about how the public would respond to an exhibit photo of a cat carrying a dead bird.
"The issue of domestic cats," Ms. O'Neill said, "is near and dear to a lot of people."

Notes

Chris Potter: cpotter@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2533.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Michael Henninger/Post-Gazette: Coda, a 10-year-old male polar bear, plays with a toy in the water at the Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium. The exhibit refers to climate change, which is affecting the bears' native habitat.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (90%); MEDICAL SCIENCE (90%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); MAMMALS (89%); MARINE MAMMALS (89%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GLACIERS & ICEBERGS (78%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (78%); METEOROLOGY (78%); PREHISTORIC LIFE (78%); RAIN FORESTS (78%); SPACE PROGRAMS (78%); SUSTAINABILITY (78%); HISTORY (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); GLOBAL WARMING (73%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (69%); EXECUTIVES (68%); BIRDS (67%); CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY (62%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%)

Company:  WATER'S EDGE SOFTWARE (51%)

Industry: SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (51%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (90%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (90%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (90%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (89%); ZOOS & AQUARIUMS (89%); BOTANICAL GARDENS (79%); EMISSIONS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); SPACE PROGRAMS (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); GLOBAL WARMING (73%); WIND ENERGY (70%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (69%); BIOFUELS (63%); COAL FIRED PLANTS (63%); NATURAL GAS (63%); CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY (62%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%); ALCOHOLS (60%); COAL INDUSTRY (60%); ETHANOL (60%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (93%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

Load-Date: November 3, 2014


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE PANELISTS URGE SWIFT ACTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 15, 2019 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 985 words
Byline: Don Hopey Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


In Soldiers&Sailors Memorial Hall&Museum, where many of the region's war veterans are commemorated, people gathered Wednesday to kick-start a battle they believe must be won quickly to mitigate the impact of climate change.
"Climate change is a global threat that will change our lives dramatically, but we can take smart, proactive steps to combat it," said U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle, D-Forest Hills, who hosted the town hall-style meeting. "But we must take those steps rapidly to avoid the most dire consequences of climate change."
Although many in the audience of about 400 appeared to be members of a knowledgeable climate change choir, the meeting was one of the first opportunities for residents of the region to learn more about the issue and potential pathways to address it.
"It's an important issue and I hope to gain a better understanding of the nuts and bolts of how climate policy will be developed in the U.S.," said Mike Roth, a doctoral student in the engineering and public policy program at Carnegie Mellon University, before the meeting started.
"It doesn't seem the current administration is very receptive to cap and trade or a carbon tax - two of the main proposals that have been hopping around. But delay will be costly, and the sooner we act the less costly it will be to address the issue."
That sense of urgency was a common theme. Mr. Doyle said the U.S. must achieve zero net carbon emissions by 2050 and become "carbon negative" after that.
Patricia DeMarco, an author, biologist and member of Forest Hills council, said the globe is on track for 2019 to be the warmest year ever recorded, and climate change is already affecting human health, infrastructure, emergency services and the natural environment. She said it's costing the nation billions of dollars a year.
"It's real, it's happening now all over the world and in Western Pennsylvania, too," she said. "The latest report by U.S. agencies says we need to reduce carbon emissions by 40% by 2030. We don't have time to dilly-dally. We need to reframe the climate change debate, to acknowledge the cost of not acting on climate change is huge."
There is scientific certainty that the global climate is warming at an unprecedented rate and that the primary cause is human activity, including the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil, that increases the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases.
On a warmer planet, growing seasons will be longer in some areas, increasing crops. But most effects will impact human populations negatively.
As temperatures continue to rise, scientists say there will be more droughts and heat waves, more severe storms and stronger hurricanes. Sea levels will rise by 1 to 4 feet by 2100, the Arctic is likely to become ice free in summer and glaciers will melt.
Two panels of experts addressed climate change topics, including how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; the workforce needs of a renewable energy economy; the development of technology to mitigate climate change impacts; and government actions at the federal, state and local levels.
Jay Whitacre, director of CMU's Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, said hundreds of researchers at CMU and the University of Pittsburgh are working on climate change, but more financial support is needed to get emerging research into the hands of big corporations with the means to implement the new technology.
Ron Gdovic, chief executive officer of WindStax Energy, a 2012 startup that manufactures hybrid wind and solar systems in Pittsburgh, said "new technologies can drive a new economy" in the region.
Ashleigh Deemer, of PennEnvironment, a statewide environmental advocacy organization, said it has been conducting a lobbying effort to educate state legislators about the perils of climate change and the need for quick action to fill the federal void, but she said it's still "a heavy lift."
Another recurring topic was economic justice for displaced workers. Jami Bey, a panel moderator and chief executive officer of UrbanKind, said, "People have to see themselves as successful in the new economy."
In a news release prior to the meeting, a coalition of 11 local organizations announced their support of the meeting, which they hoped would be the first of many to draw attention to and help speed action on the issue.
"[The meeting] comes at an opportune time, as there is a push from the American people to greater prioritize climate change during the presidential debates, and every day more studies emerge about how little time we have to act as climate change affects our food, air, water, health and supersizes weather events in more dire ways than previously thought," the coalition stated
The coalition also encouraged other members of the Pennsylvania congressional delegation to follow Mr. Doyle's example by holding town halls of their own on climate change.
"While we believe it's important to broaden the understanding about the severity and widespread impact of climate change, it's equally important for our elected officials at all levels of government to transition this knowledge into finally doing something," the coalition stated. "We will look for further opportunities to hold our decision makers accountable and push them to enact meaningful policies."
Mr. Doyle said he's optimistic about enacting a robust climate change policy, but admitted it will require "changing a lot of faces in the Senate and, most importantly, in the White House."
Art Fleming, a retired ophthalmologist, and his wife, Sharyn, who have 24 grandchildren, left the meeting feeling optimistic.
"It was great to hear people talking about all this stuff and the concerns about climate change," Mr. Fleming said. "People are involved. I'm hopeful. They're working on a lot of stuff. I think it will happen eventually. It has to."
Don Hopey: dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. Twitter: @donhopey.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alexandra Wimley/Post-Gazette: Audience members listen as a panelist speaks Wednesday during a town hall on climate change, hosted by U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle at Soldiers&Sailors Memorial Hall&Museum in Oakland.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EMISSIONS (89%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); SEVERE WEATHER (78%); VETERANS (78%); WEATHER (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); WRITERS (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (68%); PUBLIC POLICY (67%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (63%); EMERGENCY SERVICES (62%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (89%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); WRITERS (73%)

Person: MICHAEL F DOYLE (79%)

Geographic: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: September 11, 2019


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE PANELISTS URGE SWIFT ACTION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 15, 2019 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 985 words
Byline: Don Hopey Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


In Soldiers&Sailors Memorial Hall&Museum, where many of the region's war veterans are commemorated, people gathered Wednesday to kick-start a battle they believe must be won quickly to mitigate the impact of climate change.
"Climate change is a global threat that will change our lives dramatically, but we can take smart, proactive steps to combat it," said U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle, D-Forest Hills, who hosted the town hall-style meeting. "But we must take those steps rapidly to avoid the most dire consequences of climate change."
Although many in the audience of about 400 appeared to be members of a knowledgeable climate change choir, the meeting was one of the first opportunities for residents of the region to learn more about the issue and potential pathways to address it.
"It's an important issue and I hope to gain a better understanding of the nuts and bolts of how climate policy will be developed in the U.S.," said Mike Roth, a doctoral student in the engineering and public policy program at Carnegie Mellon University, before the meeting started.
"It doesn't seem the current administration is very receptive to cap and trade or a carbon tax - two of the main proposals that have been hopping around. But delay will be costly, and the sooner we act the less costly it will be to address the issue."
That sense of urgency was a common theme. Mr. Doyle said the U.S. must achieve zero net carbon emissions by 2050 and become "carbon negative" after that.
Patricia DeMarco, an author, biologist and member of Forest Hills council, said the globe is on track for 2019 to be the warmest year ever recorded, and climate change is already affecting human health, infrastructure, emergency services and the natural environment. She said it's costing the nation billions of dollars a year.
"It's real, it's happening now all over the world and in Western Pennsylvania, too," she said. "The latest report by U.S. agencies says we need to reduce carbon emissions by 40% by 2030. We don't have time to dilly-dally. We need to reframe the climate change debate, to acknowledge the cost of not acting on climate change is huge."
There is scientific certainty that the global climate is warming at an unprecedented rate and that the primary cause is human activity, including the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil, that increases the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases.
On a warmer planet, growing seasons will be longer in some areas, increasing crops. But most effects will impact human populations negatively.
As temperatures continue to rise, scientists say there will be more droughts and heat waves, more severe storms and stronger hurricanes. Sea levels will rise by 1 to 4 feet by 2100, the Arctic is likely to become ice free in summer and glaciers will melt.
Two panels of experts addressed climate change topics, including how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; the workforce needs of a renewable energy economy; the development of technology to mitigate climate change impacts; and government actions at the federal, state and local levels.
Jay Whitacre, director of CMU's Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, said hundreds of researchers at CMU and the University of Pittsburgh are working on climate change, but more financial support is needed to get emerging research into the hands of big corporations with the means to implement the new technology.
Ron Gdovic, chief executive officer of WindStax Energy, a 2012 startup that manufactures hybrid wind and solar systems in Pittsburgh, said "new technologies can drive a new economy" in the region.
Ashleigh Deemer, of PennEnvironment, a statewide environmental advocacy organization, said it has been conducting a lobbying effort to educate state legislators about the perils of climate change and the need for quick action to fill the federal void, but she said it's still "a heavy lift."
Another recurring topic was economic justice for displaced workers. Jami Bey, a panel moderator and chief executive officer of UrbanKind, said, "People have to see themselves as successful in the new economy."
In a news release prior to the meeting, a coalition of 11 local organizations announced their support of the meeting, which they hoped would be the first of many to draw attention to and help speed action on the issue.
"[The meeting] comes at an opportune time, as there is a push from the American people to greater prioritize climate change during the presidential debates, and every day more studies emerge about how little time we have to act as climate change affects our food, air, water, health and supersizes weather events in more dire ways than previously thought," the coalition stated
The coalition also encouraged other members of the Pennsylvania congressional delegation to follow Mr. Doyle's example by holding town halls of their own on climate change.
"While we believe it's important to broaden the understanding about the severity and widespread impact of climate change, it's equally important for our elected officials at all levels of government to transition this knowledge into finally doing something," the coalition stated. "We will look for further opportunities to hold our decision makers accountable and push them to enact meaningful policies."
Mr. Doyle said he's optimistic about enacting a robust climate change policy, but admitted it will require "changing a lot of faces in the Senate and, most importantly, in the White House."
Art Fleming, a retired ophthalmologist, and his wife, Sharyn, who have 24 grandchildren, left the meeting feeling optimistic.
"It was great to hear people talking about all this stuff and the concerns about climate change," Mr. Fleming said. "People are involved. I'm hopeful. They're working on a lot of stuff. I think it will happen eventually. It has to."
Don Hopey: dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. Twitter: @donhopey.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alexandra Wimley/Post-Gazette: Audience members listen as a panelist speaks Wednesday during a town hall on climate change, hosted by U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle at Soldiers&Sailors Memorial Hall&Museum in Oakland.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EMISSIONS (89%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); SEVERE WEATHER (78%); VETERANS (78%); WEATHER (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); WRITERS (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (68%); PUBLIC POLICY (67%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (63%); EMERGENCY SERVICES (62%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (89%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (89%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); WRITERS (73%)

Person: MICHAEL F DOYLE (79%)

Geographic: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: September 11, 2019


End of Document


GLOBAL WARMING ISSUE HARD TO QUELL EARTH DAY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 22, 2012 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; EARTH DAY; Pg. A-1
Length: 1375 words
Byline: Don Hopey, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


With all due respect to teams still skating in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the world's most important "hockey stick" on this 43rd Earth Day is wielded by Michael E. Mann and other climate scientists.
Mr. Mann, a Pennsylvania State University professor and director of the school's Earth Systems Science Center, produced a graph in 1998, later dubbed the "hockey stick," that showed global temperatures were level or declining for almost 1,000 years -- the long shaft of the stick -- before spiking sharply upward over the past century.
That upward-turned hockey stick "blade" tracked climbing global temperatures that coincided with the world's growing combustion of fossil fuels and the billowing atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide, a so-called "greenhouse gas," that has climbed from 280 parts per million in pre-industrial times to 392 parts per million today.
"That buildup of carbon dioxide is not natural and no matter how you cut it, the globe is warming and the climate is changing," said Mr. Mann, in an interview earlier this month at the University of Pittsburgh.
"The hockey stick graph showed that recent warming is without precedent in the past 1,000 years, and allowed the public to accept in good faith the reality of climate change."
But the hockey stick has become a lightning rod for the doubters and deniers of climate change science, who say claims from "global-warming alarmists" are either exaggerated or fabricated.
Mr. Mann, author of the new book, "The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars," said doubts sown by climate change critics are more a product of free-market philosophy than legitimate scientific skepticism.
And he said those voices are part of a campaign, financed by fossil fuel interests, that has paralyzed U.S. policymakers and delayed efforts to reduce carbon emissions even as evidence and public awareness mounts.
*
Recent scientific studies, global temperature data and extreme weather events all point to growing evidence of the impact of global climate change, Mr. Mann said. For example:
* The oceans are 30 percent more acidic than in pre-industrial times due in part to higher carbon dioxide levels, and studies predict that by the end of this century all coral reefs may be dead.
* A 2010 study reported in the journal Nature blames global warming for a 40 percent decline in phytoplankton since 1950 in the world's oceans. The microscopic plankton form the foundation of the marine food web, ingest harmful carbon dioxide and produce half the world's oxygen.
* The thawing of the East Siberian permafrost under the Arctic Shelf and the leakage of large amounts of methane have been linked to global warming. According to research published in the journal Science in March 2010, the permafrost, long considered an impermeable frozen barrier, is perforated. If even a fraction of the 1.5 trillion tons of frozen carbon vents into the atmosphere it could trigger abrupt climate warming.
*
It has been 20 years since President George H.W. Bush signed on to the United Nations' first climate change document and challenged world leaders to act to protect the planet.
The expectation was that science would determine at what level greenhouse gas concentrations could be and should be stabilized to prevent dangerous manmade interference with the world's climate systems, the world would listen and then the world would act.
But that hasn't happened.
"The skeptics have made a remarkably successful effort to say the climate change is not happening, and failing that, they say it is not manmade," said M. Granger Morgan, the Lord Chair professor in engineering and head of Carnegie Mellon University's Engineering and Public Policy Department. "They have done that despite the fact that virtually all serious climate scientists would not agree with that view."
Naomi Oreskes, a professor of history and science studies at the University of California, San Diego, said climate change doubters have been successful because they've been both consistent and persistent in delivering the message that the science is still uncertain.
"This message has proved effective: Polls show that many Americans, perhaps as many as 50 percent or so, believe that the science is still uncertain, that scientists are still arguing about it, and that climate change might just be natural variability," Ms. Oreskes said.
But the debates about the science of climate change aren't really about the science, she said, just as debates about leaded gasoline, secondhand smoke, the "ozone hole," mercury emissions and DDT, weren't about the science that resulted in governmental action to control those problems.
"Those debates were about governance, or more specifically about the role of regulation in governance," Ms. Oreskes said.
J. Scott Armstrong, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Management, is one of those who has raised questions about the need for government regulations to control emissions.
Mr. Armstrong, a Pittsburgh native and a forecasting expert, said almost none of the climate change modeling work on which the dire global warming predictions are based meets scientific standards.
"The climate modeling doesn't make sense to me scientifically" said Mr. Armstrong, who is listed as a climate expert by the Heartland Institute, a Chicago-based libertarian, pro-free market, think tank with a history of questioning climate change science. "My assessment of their methodology says there is nothing to worry about."
*
Gallop polls measuring public awareness of climate change have found the percentage of Americans who say they're worried about global warming has declined from a high of 66 percent in 2008 to 51 percent last year, but a higher percentage, 80 percent, say they're more aware of the issue.
A poll released last week by the Yale Project on Climate Change Communication found a large majority of Americans believe several high-profile weather events in 2011 were made worse by global warming, including the unusually warm winter, record high summer temperatures, the drought in Texas and Oklahoma, the Mississippi River floods and Hurricane Irene.
Mr. Mann said policymakers cannot wait until all the scientific questions are answered before they act because then it will be too late to have much of an effect. Already, scientists project that greenhouse gases must be reduced by 80 percent below current emissions levels to avoid catastrophic impacts.
And the Carnegie Mellon University's Climate Decision Making Center Webpage states flatly: "If policymakers are to do anything about global warming, they will have to make decisions now."
Myron Ebell, director of the Competitive Enterprise Institute's Center for Energy and Environment, which has opposed any attempt to regulate greenhouse gas emissions, said even if there is global warming, Americans and the world will still need coal, gas and other fossil fuels to run the technology, including air conditioning, to deal with it.
And he said proposals to reduce use of coal and fossil fuels will make it impossible to survive any warming that occurs.
Mr. Ebell said scientists, including Mr. Mann, who have gone public with climate-change concerns, are "not trustworthy," calling them "con men," and "bad apples." He says those who warn about global warming are engaged in a conspiracy of false science.
Ms. Oreskes said the focus now should be on solutions.
"We know that climate change is being driven almost entirely by two things: deforestation and greenhouse gas emissions. Some really good steps have already been taken to reduce deforestation; these steps need to be supported and strengthened.
"But the elephant in the room is greenhouse gases. We need an immediate program, on the scale of the Apollo program, to convert our energy economy from fossils fuels to renewables. And we know it can be done. Our energy basis was transformed before, and it can be transformed again."
Bottom line, according to Mr. Mann, is that the science of climate change is settled but the specifics of how, and how much of, those changes will play out remains unknown.
"We're still trying to understand things," Mr. Mann said. "The science is difficult and we don't have definite answers.
"But nature has already decided, and we may not like her decisions."

Notes

Don Hopey: dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. /

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Robin Rombach/Post-Gazette: Climate-change expert Michael Mann says policymakers can't wait until questions are answered before they act on global warming.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); GLOBAL WARMING (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EARTH DAY (90%); ICE HOCKEY (90%); MEDICAL SCIENCE (90%); WINTER SPORTS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (78%); SPORTS & RECREATION (78%); WEATHER (78%); WRITERS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); ISLANDS & REEFS (73%); SEVERE WEATHER (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (66%); OCEANS (65%)

Organization: PENN STATE UNIVERSITY (58%); UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH (55%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (91%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (89%); PUBLISHING (79%); EMISSIONS (78%); METHANE (78%); WRITERS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); NATURAL GAS (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (79%); EARTH (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (74%); ARCTIC (79%)

Load-Date: April 23, 2012


End of Document


NOMINEE'S CLIMATE VIEWS RAISING CONCERNS AT SENATE, U.N.; CRAFT: 'BOTH SIDES' OF SCIENCE WORTHY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 5, 2019 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A-5
Length: 1363 words
Byline: Michael Wilner and Lesley Clark McClatchy Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump's nominee for U.S. ambassador to the United Nations is raising concern among senators important to her confirmation and diplomats in New York over her skeptical views on climate change.
Kelly Craft, currently serving as Mr. Trump's ambassador to Canada, drew the attention of foreign dignitaries in 2017 when she said "both sides of the science" had merit in the climate debate. But at the U.N. - where climate science is no longer subject to disagreement, where the threat tops the organization's concerns and has the rare effect of unifying member states - her appointment underscores Mr. Trump's dismissal of the perils of a warming Earth and his administration's general contempt for the U.N. itself.
Ms. Craft's position on climate change - and the message it sends to the world, should she be confirmed as U.N. ambassador - will be a central topic for Democrats in her confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, congressional staffers say.
Three Democratic senators wrote Ms. Craft a letter on Friday seeking assurances that she "will put our nation's interests ahead of your personal financial interests," citing the work of her husband, Joe Craft, CEO of Alliance Resource Partners, one of the largest U.S. coal producers.
The letter reveals that Ms. Craft's financial disclosures show $63 million in personal investments in oil, gas and coal assets, according to a copy obtained by McClatchy.
"We are writing to seek additional information about your views on the Paris agreement and international climate policy, as well as any potential conflicts of interest you may have," wrote Democratic Sens. Edward Markey of Massachusetts, Jeff Merkley of Oregon and Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island. Mr. Markey and Mr. Merkley are members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which is expected to hold Ms. Craft's confirmation hearing later this spring.
The four-page letter includes a list of 13 questions, starting with: "Do you acknowledge that climate change caused by humans is real? If not, why not?"
An adviser to Ms. Craft, speaking on condition of anonymity, dismissed concerns that Ms. Craft would not make a suitable representative for the United States, noting Ms. Craft had served as ambassador to Canada when the two governments were engaged in contentious trade talks.
"She was U.S. ambassador for Canada when there were significant risks," said the adviser. "She was at the center of it and she handled a lot of these issues with great deft and tact and diplomacy as a diplomat should."
But diplomats also say they are cognizant of Ms. Craft's energy ties.
"Everyone is aware of the background of the president's nominee, and people will likely consider the lobbies she's affiliated with," one European diplomat told McClatchy. "It's made an impression, of course, but I don't think people are particularly surprised that we're getting that kind of nominee from this kind of administration."
A second European diplomat concurred, noting that every country in the U.N. had entered the 2016 Paris climate accord. Mr. Trump announced his intent to withdraw the United States from that agreement the following year.
One American diplomat, who worked at the U.S. mission to the U.N. under Mr. Trump during Nikki Haley's tenure as ambassador, acknowledged Ms. Craft's view could affect her leadership role because climate science is not questioned at the U.N.
Mr. Markey, the Senate sponsor of the Green New Deal proposal that seeks to tackle climate change, said that he plans to question Ms. Craft on her climate change views at her nomination hearing.
"I have deep, deep concerns about her ties to the coal industry," Mr. Markey told McClatchy in an interview. "This nomination sends a deeply troubling signal to the rest of the world that not only does the president believe that climate change is a Chinese hoax, but that he is going to name a U.N. ambassador with extremely close ties to the coal industry."
One former Republican senator, John Danforth of Missouri, who served six months as U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. under President George W. Bush, said he expects Ms. Craft's views to matter little.
"The ambassador to the U.N. represents the policies of the administration and that's what the focus is on," said Mr. Danforth, who was at the U.N. in 2004. "It's not about any particular ambassador, it's about 'What is the position of the administration?' "
To foreign diplomats, that is part of the problem. In Mr. Craft's case, they struggle to distinguish between her personal skepticism of the science fundamental to understanding climate change and the administration's dismissive approach to the issue.
"Obviously people are somewhat dismayed at these sorts of comments, and I think people will be disappointed. But I'm not sure it'll impact her credibility more broadly, to be honest," the first European official continued. " I think she'll be judged more on how she manages the politics of the U.N."
While several senior figures in the administration - including officials leading the Domestic Policy Council, the Council on Environmental Quality and the Council of Economic Advisers - recognize climate change as a national security threat, other forces within the White House support the establishment of a review that would question the premise of interagency concerns. Climate assessments commissioned by Congress state that unmitigated carbon dioxide emissions are warming the planet, prompting rising sea levels, extreme weather events, widespread drought, uninhabitable lands and the deaths of entire ecosystems.
Among those entertaining a review is the president himself, who privately fumed when the most recent national climate assessment was released last November under his name. That report found the effects of climate change are "intensifying" across the country and would result in "substantial damages on the U.S. economy, human health, and the environment."
"I think something's happening," Mr. Trump told CBS's "60 Minutes" in October. "Something's changing and it'll change back again. I don't think it's a hoax, I think there's probably a difference. But I don't know that it's man-made."
A senior administration official told McClatchy that the president "takes seriously the issue of climate change, and it is important that policies and decision-making be based on transparent and defensible science."
But Erin Pelton, who served as spokeswoman for the U.S. mission to the U.N. under Obama-era Ambassadors Susan Rice and Samantha Power, said the United States is already an outlier on climate change on the international stage.
"The U.S. is already so alone on climate change that the primary drivers on climate change at the U.N. have already written the U.S. off," she said. "They're moving forward without us."
She suggested Ms. Craft's views are in line with Mr. Trump and many other Republicans and questioned instead whether Ms. Craft's limited experience would play a larger factor in how she is received at the U.N. Ms. Craft has received favorable reviews from Canadian officials as ambassador in Ottawa, but the new role would be more expansive.
"It's a much more high-profile role that she's going to have to navigate with a limited diplomatic track record and these are tricky issues," said Ms. Pelton, now managing director at the public affairs firm Mercury.
She added that acting U.N. ambassador Jonathan Cohen last month was nominated to be ambassador to Egypt and could soon be departing. "There's not a lot of support in the mission at the most senior levels to guide her and steer her," she said.
Ms. Craft is not expected to retain the Cabinet-level status that her predecessor, Ms. Haley, won from Mr. Trump at the outset of his presidency. During her tenure, Ms. Haley pushed back against the widespread impression that Mr. Trump's withdrawal from the Paris agreement reflected his disbelief in climate change.
"Just because we pulled out of the Paris accord doesn't mean we don't believe in climate protection," Ms. Haley said at the time. "We're not saying that climate change is not real. It is real."
Visit the McClatchy Washington Bureau at www.mcclatchydc.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Adrian Wyld/The Canadian Press via AP: Kelly Craft is the current United States Ambassador to Canada and Donald Trump's nominee for U.S. ambassador to the United Nations.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (94%); UNITED NATIONS (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); LOBBYING (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); DISMISSALS (74%); EXECUTIVES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%)

Company:  ALLIANCE RESOURCE PARTNERS LP (55%)

Ticker: ARLP (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS212111 BITUMINOUS COAL & LIGNITE SURFACE MINING (55%); SIC1221 BITUMINOUS COAL & LIGNITE SURFACE MINING (55%); PUBLISHING (73%); COAL INDUSTRY (65%); COAL MINING (65%)

Person: ABBY FINKENAUER (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); EDWARD J MARKEY (79%); JEFF MERKLEY (58%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (58%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CANADA (93%)

Load-Date: May 5, 2019


End of Document


STUDY WARNS OF DRASTIC Pa. CLIMATE CHANGE \; HOTTER SUMMERS AND WINTERS, FLOODS ALL PART OF THE MIX
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 7, 2014 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1
Length: 1100 words
Byline: Don Hopey, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Pennsylvanians will need to adapt quickly to already occurring climate change that is causing more frequent and intense rainstorms and flooding, and hotter, longer and potentially more deadly summer heat waves, according to the third U.S. National Climate Assessment released Tuesday.
In other regions of the U.S. the assessment also predicted dire, long-term consequences for failing to act quickly to reduce man-made greenhouse gas emissions that are fueling a changing climate. Those include heat waves and drought in California and the Southwest, wildfires and a degraded forest ecosystem in the West, a decline in species diversity and an increase in invasive species, and higher levels of air pollution in warming urban areas.
John Holdren, science adviser for the Obama administration, which recently has begun pushing its climate change policies, including limitations on greenhouse gas emissions, said the assessment is "the loudest and clearest alarm bell to date signaling the need to take urgent action."
The periodic federal climate assessment, compiled by 13 federal agencies with input from more than 300 scientists, advisers and government administrators, is mandated by a 1990 law and updates assessments released in 2000 and 2009. The 840-page report makes a strong case that climate changes already are occurring in many parts of the U.S. and the impacts on ecosystems, infrastructure, economics and public health will continue to grow.
The assessment predicts that the Northeast, a region that includes Pennsylvania, will experience warmer winters and less snowfall. In mountainous regions, including much of Pennsylvania and West Virginia, more intense precipitation events will mean greater flood risk, particularly in valleys, where people, infrastructure and agriculture tend to be concentrated.
And along the Atlantic seaboard, continuing sea level rise could triple the frequency of flooding and severely damage water, sewer and electrical systems and human health, said Radley Horton, research scientist at Columbia University and the lead author of the assessment's Northeast region chapter. He said flooding along the Atlantic seaboard could cause "multiple systems failures in a cascade effect," and warned that the extreme heat waves could be deadly for young people, the elderly and the disadvantaged.
"I see a real risk, a growing risk of very negative outcomes for residents of the Northeast," said Mr. Horton, during a teleconference Tuesday afternoon that was hosted by Climate Nexus, an organization focused on climate change policy and clean energy solutions, and attended by a half-dozen other authors of the assessment.
They urged states to implement mitigation and adaptation strategies to address what the report calls "climate disruption," but noted that while most states have adopted climate action plans, implementation is in the early stages for most.
"We are being presented clearly with evidence that it's time to make a change in the pathway we are on," said Kirstin Dow, professor of geography at the University of South Carolina and lead author of the assessment's Research Agenda for the Climate Change Chapter. "And there are opportunities to go a better way."
Mr. Horton said in the Northeast region, West Virginia is the state that has done the least. It has not started to develop a climate action plan. The other states in the region either have action plans or are moving in that direction.
Pennsylvania, which produces 1 percent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions and 4 percent of the U.S. total, approved an almost 800-page climate action plan in December 2009. The state Department of Environmental Protection issued an updated report at the end of last year that removed a provision in the 2009 plan that set an air pollution reduction target of 30 percent by 2020, pays little attention to renewable energy or proposed expansion of natural gas usage and mandates no state action.
Patrick Henderson, Gov. Tom Corbett's energy executive and deputy chief of staff, stated, "The statute lays out the specific requirements put forth by the General Assembly that are to be included in the action plan, along with recommendations to assist in mitigating climate change and further reducing emissions..."
U.S. Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., issued a statement saying the assessment is a reminder that climate change is already having significant impacts on the nation and urging development of "sensible policies to stave off more dramatic consequences over the next century."
The assessment highlighted Pennsylvania's efforts to generate 18 percent of its electricity from wind, solar and geothermal power sources by 2021, and Pittsburgh's pledge to reduce energy use by 20 percent by 2020 in 1.77 million square feet of its buildings. Allegheny College in Meadville, Crawford County, committed to the same goal for 1.3 million square feet of building space.
David Dzombak, a professor and chair of the Civil and Environmental Engineering Department at Carnegie Mellon University, said the department began an initiative this year to look at climate change's impact on water and the environment.
"Climate change is occurring and every region of the country will be affected in different ways," Mr. Dzombak said. "In the Northeast it means that storm water management challenges already facing the region will be even more challenging, the number of cooling days will increase and the number of heating days will likely decrease."
To reduce climate change impacts, Mr. Dzombak said greenhouse gas emissions must be significantly reduced.
"To make a dent, a large amount of carbon dioxide reduction needs to occur," he said. "But there's already large momentum toward warming, and given carbon dioxide's long-term residency in the atmosphere, there will be warming, and adaptation will be required. That's what we're working on."
The assessment was hailed by environmental organizations and scored by industry groups, Republican leaders and conservatives as alarmist and another example of government overreach.
Katharine Hayhoe, lead author of the report's climate change science chapter and director of the Climate Science Center at Texas Tech University, acknowledged that while there remain some climate change skeptics who are philosophically or ideologically opposed to acknowledging climate change, most people understand it's real but don't think action is a priority.
"They know it's an issue, but they'll worry about it later," she said. "For those, the report shows how the climate is changing here and now, no matter what part of the country we are living in."

Notes

Don Hopey: dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. / The Associated Press contributed. /

Graphic

 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: U.S. National Climate Assessment; MCT: (Mapping climate change
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (90%); HEAT WAVES (90%); MEDICAL SCIENCE (90%); WEATHER (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (89%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (89%); SALTWATER ECOSYSTEMS (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); SEVERE SUMMER WEATHER (89%); WRITERS (89%); DROUGHT (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); FLOOD ZONES (78%); FLOODS & FLOODING (78%); GEOGRAPHY (78%); GREENHOUSE GASES (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH (78%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (77%); SCIENCE POLICY (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); MOUNTAINS (75%); WILDFIRES (75%); LAND DEGRADATION (73%); AIR QUALITY (72%); AIR POLLUTION (71%); FIRES (71%); INVASIVE SPECIES (70%); SOCIAL SCIENCE EDUCATION (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

Industry: WRITERS (89%); EMISSIONS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); FLOOD ZONES (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%)

Geographic: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (93%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: May 7, 2014


End of Document


THE PHENOMENON THAT DARE NOT SPEAK ITS NAME; WHEN DID 'CLIMATE CHANGE' AND 'GLOBAL WARMING' BECOME 'CLEAN ENERGY'?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
February 1, 2012 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-7
Length: 747 words
Byline: Maxwell T. Boykoff
Body


What happened to "climate change" and "global warming"?
The Earth is still getting hotter, but those terms have nearly disappeared from political vocabulary. Instead, they have been replaced by less charged and more consumer-friendly expressions for the warming planet.
President Barack Obama's State of the Union address was a prime example of this shift. The president said "climate change" just once -- compared with zero mentions in the 2011 address and two in 2010. When he did utter the phrase, it was merely to acknowledge the polarized atmosphere in Washington, saying, "The differences in this chamber may be too deep right now to pass a comprehensive plan to fight climate change."
By contrast, Mr. Obama used the terms "energy" and "clean energy" nearly two dozen times.
That tally reflects a broader change in how the president talks about the planet. A recent Brown University study looked specifically at the Obama administration's language and found that mentions of "climate change" have been replaced by calls for "clean energy" and "energy independence."
Graciela Kincaid, a co-author of the study, wrote: "The phrases 'climate change' and 'global warming' have become all but taboo on Capitol Hill. These terms are stunningly absent from the political arena."
In 2009, the Obama administration purposefully began to refer to greenhouse gas emissions as "carbon pollution" and "heat-trapping emissions." This change is evident in statements from top officials such as White House science adviser John Holdren, Energy Secretary Steven Chu, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration head Jane Lubchenco and Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson.
Ms. Lubchenco told a reporter that the choice of those terms "is intended to make what's happening more understandable and more accessible to non-technical audiences."
These choices are also reflected in news coverage around the world. My colleague Maria Mansfield and I monitor 50 major newspapers in 20 countries, and we documented that explicit mentions of "climate change" and "global warming" dropped by more than a third from 2010 to 2011.
There is power in how language is deployed, and people setting policy agendas know this well. In 2002, Republican political strategist Frank Luntz issued a widely cited memo advising that the Bush administration should shift its rhetoric on the climate. "It's time for us to start talking about 'climate change' instead of global warming. . . . 'Climate change' is less frightening than 'global warming,' " the memo said.
Mr. Luntz was not alone in wanting to change the terminology. The nonprofit group EcoAmerica issued a report in 2009 arguing that the terms "global warming" and "climate change" both needed rebranding. In their place, the group recommended the phrase "our deteriorating atmosphere."
But what do we lose when global warming and climate change get repackaged as clean energy? We wind up missing a thorough understanding of the breadth of the problem and the range of possible solutions.
To start, talking only about clean energy omits critical biological and physical factors that contribute to the warming climate. "Clean energy" doesn't call to mind the ways we use the land and how the environment is changing.
Where in the term is the notion of the climate pollution that results from clear-cutting Amazon rain forests? What about methane release in the Arctic, where global warming is exposing new areas of soil in the permafrost?
"Clean energy" also neatly bypasses any idea that we might need to curb our consumption. If the energy is clean, after all, why worry about how much we're using -- or how unequal the access to energy sources might be?
And terms such as "carbon pollution" ignore that climate change isn't just a carbon issue. Some greenhouse gases, such as nitrous oxide, do not contain carbon, and not all carbon-containing emissions, such as carbon monoxide, trap heat.
When the president moves away from talking about climate change and talks more generally about energy, as he did in the State of the Union, calling for "an all-out, all-of-the-above strategy that develops every available source of American energy," the impact is more than just political.
Calling climate change by another name creates limits of its own. The way we talk about the problem affects how we deal with it. And though some new wording may deflect political heat, it can't alter the fact that, "climate change" or not, the climate is changing.

Notes

Maxwell T. Boykoff (boykoff@colorado.edu) is an assistant professor in the Center for Science and Technology Policy Research at the University of Colorado at Boulder and the author of "Who Speaks for the Climate? Making Sense of Media Reporting on Climate Change." He wrote this for The Washington Post. /
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); GLOBAL WARMING (93%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EMISSIONS (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (78%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (78%); WRITERS (78%); US CONGRESS (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (76%); AIR POLLUTION (75%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); GREENHOUSE GASES (73%); REBRANDING (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (68%); NEWS REPORTING (67%); CONSERVATION (64%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

Organization: BROWN UNIVERSITY (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (93%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (90%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); EMISSIONS (89%); WRITERS (78%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (76%); PUBLISHING (74%); REBRANDING (73%); NEWS REPORTING (67%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (92%); STEVEN CHU (58%); LISA P JACKSON (57%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: February 2, 2012


End of Document


U.N. CHIEF: 'RAPID' CUTS NEEDED TO CURB CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
September 17, 2021 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2021 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ASECTION; Pg. A-4
Length: 461 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


The head of the United Nations called Thursday for "immediate, rapid and large-scale" cuts in greenhouse gas emissions to curb global warming and avert climate disaster.
Ahead of the annual U.N. General Assembly meeting next week, Antonio Guterres warned governments that climate change is proceeding faster than predicted and fossil fuel emissions have already bounced back from a pandemic dip.
Speaking at the launch of a U.N.-backed report summarizing current efforts to tackle climate change, Mr. Guterres said recent extreme weather - from Hurricane Ida in the United States to floods in western Europe and the deadly heatwave in the Pacific Northwest - showed no country is safe from climate-related disasters.
"These changes are just the beginning of worse to come," he said, appealing to governments to meet the goals of the 2015 Paris climate accord.
Lawyer accused in murder plot exits jail
Instead of a suit and tie, lawyer Alex Murdaugh found himself in a jail jumpsuit Thursday in a cramped South Carolina courtroom, struggling to wipe tears from his eyes with handcuffed wrists as his lawyer detailed how his life crumbled over the past three months.
Mr. Murdaugh discovered the bodies of his wife and son, shot multiple times at their Colleton County home June 7. His drug addiction got worse and in a deep depression on Sept. 4, he decided he should die, but instead of killing himself, he hired someone to do it, defense attorney Dick Harpootlian said.
The goal was to get his surviving son a $10 million life insurance benefit, state police said.
But the shot only grazed his head and Mr. Murdaugh, 53, was charged Thursday with insurance fraud, conspiracy and filing a false police report - all felonies that could bring up to 20 years in prison if convicted of all three charges.
The killings of Mr. Murdaugh's wife, Maggie, and son Paul in June remain unsolved. Mr. Harpootlian said Mr. Murdaugh is adamant he had nothing to do with their deaths
Mr. Murdaugh spent about five hours in the Hampton County jail before being issued a $20,000 bond and being released on his own recognizance.
California wildfires imperil giant trees
Firefighters wrapped the base of the world's largest tree in a fire-resistant blanket as they tried to save a famous grove of gigantic old-growth sequoias from wildfires burning Thursday in California's rugged Sierra Nevada.
The colossal General Sherman Tree in Sequoia National Park's Giant Forest, some of the other sequoias, the Giant Forest Museum and other buildings were wrapped as protection against the possibility of intense flames, fire spokeswoman Rebecca Paterson said.
The General Sherman Tree is the largest in the world by volume, at 52,508 cubic feet, according to the National Park Service. It towers 275 feet high.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LAWYERS (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); SEVERE WEATHER (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); FIRES (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); WILDFIRES (89%); FOREST FIRES (84%); NATIONAL PARKS (83%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (83%); FLOODS & FLOODING (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); WEATHER (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); CONSPIRACY (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (73%); FALSE STATEMENTS (73%); FELONIES (73%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); MURDER (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); POLICE FORCES (72%); PARKS & RECREATION DEPARTMENTS (70%); DEATH & DYING (69%); FALSE CRIME REPORTS (68%); INSURANCE FRAUD (68%); FIRE SAFE MATERIALS & PRODUCTS (64%); PUBLIC LAND MANAGEMENT (60%); ADDICTION (51%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (51%)

Industry: LAWYERS (91%); EMISSIONS (90%); NATIONAL PARKS (83%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (83%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (76%); PUBLISHING (73%); INSURANCE (63%)

Person: ANTONIO GUTERRES (79%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NORTHWEST USA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: September 17, 2021


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE THREATENS NATIONAL SECURITY; THIS ISSUE IS ABOUT SCIENCE, NOT POLITICS, AND THE MILITARY IS TAKING IT VERY SERIOUSLY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
July 6, 2014 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 621 words
Byline: DAVID W. TITLEY
Body


Climate change is an accelerating threat to national security. That's the finding of a recent report by the CNA Corporation's Military Advisory Board, a panel I serve on along with some of our country's most senior retired military leaders.
Each of us is a hard-nosed leader with decades of experience evaluating national security risks. We have been keeping an eye on climate change for years, first reporting on it as a potential national security threat in 2007.
Since then, we have seen the scientific consensus continue to develop and solidify, while signatures of a warming world - from global temperature trends to severe weather events - strongly suggest that our climate is already changing. And we are increasingly worried about the lack of comprehensive action by the United States and the global community.
The changing climate is already serving as a catalyst for conflict. Consider, for example, the severe drought in the years leading up to the civil war in Syria. The drought didn't cause the war, but it certainly served as a destabilizing factor.
Struggles for control of food, water and energy supplies escalate tensions between ethnic groups, religious groups and nations. And as we're seeing in Iraq, ancient tensions can flare up into deadly conflict.
I used to be something of a skeptic about climate change. I have a Ph.D in meteorology. I know how complicated the weather system is and how difficult it is to predict accurately the weather even a few days in advance.
But climate is not about predictions of a specific day's weather months or years in the future. It's understanding the trends: hotter or colder, wetter or drier, trends in sea level rise and in severe storms.
Over the years, scientific findings on climate change have built to the point where we simply cannot afford to ignore them. And this is true no matter what your politics might be. The climate doesn't care about politics.
I had the privilege to initiate the Navy's Task Force on Climate Change. In the Navy, we found it was important to step away from the emotions and the politics of the issue. We worked to evaluate the changing climate like we'd evaluate any other change the Pentagon needs to deal with, like a coup that topples a political regime or a shift in a fragile region's demographics or economy.
So we'd look at, for example, rising sea levels. This century, global sea levels are projected to rise several feet. Naval bases and installations around the world - along with the communities that support them - will be affected, and we need to plan for that.
Climate change affects military readiness, strains base resilience, creates missions in new regions of the world and increases the likelihood that our armed forces will be deployed for humanitarian missions. In many cases it also threatens our infrastructure and affects our economy. And our continued reliance on the fossil fuels whose consumption leads to climate change ties our nation's hands on the world stage and tethers us to nations that do not always have our best interests at heart.
Climate scientists tell us we can still head off the worst effects of climate change. We can become more energy efficient and move toward cleaner sources of energy in ways that make economic sense. We can work on adaptation strategies to protect people and resources in the face of the climate change that is already locked in.
But we need to get moving. Last year was the fourth warmest on record. It was the 37th year in a row that global average temperatures were above the long-term average. All of the top 10 warmest years on record have been logged since 1998.
The climate is changing. We can do something about it. For the sake of our nation and the world, we must act.

Notes

David Titley is a retired rear admiral who directs the Center for Solutions to Weather and Climate Risk at Penn State (wxcrisk@gmail.com). He served in the Navy for 32 years and was the Navy oceanographer and navigator from 2009 to 2012. Adm. Titley addressed this issue last month at the Jewish Community Center in Squirrel Hill. /

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Forum_Climate070614 earth sun
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); NATIONAL SECURITY (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); DROUGHT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); NAVIES (89%); SEVERE WEATHER (89%); TRENDS (89%); WEATHER (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); METEOROLOGY (79%); CIVIL WAR (78%); COUPS (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (72%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (72%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (71%); WATER RESOURCES (70%); EMOTIONS (69%); RACE & ETHNICITY (68%); SYRIAN CRISIS (68%); ETHNIC GROUPS (66%); RELIGION (51%)

Industry: ARMED FORCES (89%); NAVIES (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); MILITARY BASES (78%); PUBLISHING (74%)

Geographic: IRAQ (79%); SYRIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: July 11, 2014


End of Document


THIS IS WHY EVEN SCIENTISTS UNDERESTIMATE CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 10, 2021 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2021 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 909 words
Byline: Gernot Wagner
Body


Scientists on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a global group backed by the United Nations, have spent the past two weeks in meetings to ready their latest assessment of the physical science underpinning past, present, and future climate change. Expect the IPCC to paint a sobering picture of what is to come. The steep costs of such a world are all too apparent, but tallying them is harder still. That latter bit is the bread and butter of climate economics: accounting for climate damages in dollars and cents. The Holy Grail is translating those numbers into how much each ton of CO2 costs society and, thus, should cost those doing the polluting. It's important but thankless - more like boring accounting than cutting-edge economics.
Seeing how it takes years to assess the latest science, with 234 authors from all over the world working through more than 14,000 studies, adding economics on top of that implies an even greater lag between the latest observed climatic changes and a full accounting of their impacts. "I think it's now clear that economists have underestimated the costs of climate change," says Naomi Oreskes, a historian of science at Harvard University. By now there are plenty of broadsides against climate economics: The discipline has "failed us," the awarding of the first-ever Nobel in climate economics may have done "more harm than good," and even calls for economics to undergo "a climate revolution." The discipline does need change, and I should know: I'm a climate economist quoted in one of those broadsides and the co-author of another. Yes, many of these critiques are self-reflective, coming from within. Criticizing, of course, is easy. Pinpointing the specific reasons for why economists have traditionally underestimated climate costs, and then improving on those shortcomings, is much harder. One reason - and speaking from my own experience - is the objective difficulty in tallying costs. Doing so "bottom-up," one heatwave or hurricane at a time, is a punishing undertaking. That has led climate economists to make often heroic assumptions that allow them to estimate climate damages "top-down" with guesstimates of how climate damages affect the economy. That's how we calculate total economic damages for each degree of global average warming. No surprise, such an exercise misses a lot of detail. It's not yet clear, though, that this top-down process would necessarily lead to underestimates. Perhaps climate economics, as a discipline, has coalesced around progressively more aggressive assumptions that end up overestimating climate costs? To glean some more insights into this question, I went back to Oreskes's book, "Why Trust Science?" The book focuses on the physical climate science and the inherent "conservatism" of the discipline. I also checked in with her about climate economics specifically. Oreskes sees parallels between the natural and social sciences. "This may be, in part, another instance of what my colleagues and I documented in physical climate science: the tendency to underestimate the rate and magnitude of climate change that we called 'erring on the side of least drama,' " she wrote in an email exchange this week. Oreskes sees that tendency as very much part of scientists' DNA: "The scientific conception of rationality as sitting in opposition to emotion leads many scientists to feel that it is important for them to be 'sober,' dispassionate, unemotional, and 'conservative.' This often leads them to be uncomfortable with dramatic findings, even when they are true."
There are indeed some countervailing forces. Dramatic headlines might be a good way to gain notoriety. But climate science and climate economics are still very much scientific disciplines, where progress happens one journal article at a time. Often the best way to advance the discipline - and have your own paper pass peer-review - is to aim for incremental progress. Climate economics may have two other factors at play. One Oreskes discussed in an op-ed she co-authored with Lord Nicholas Stern: Climate effects are likely to be cascading, and economists may be lacking the tools to specifically deal with these cascading effects. Economists are wont of compartmentalizing. Tackling one problem at a time has its clear advantages, but as I have argued (with the European Climate Foundation's Tom Brookes), "marginal thinking is inadequate for an all-consuming problem touching every aspect of society."
The second reason Oreskes identified has more to do with the overall orientation of the field of economics. She said it has "tended to be over-confident about the power of markets, and reluctant to acknowledge market failure on the grand scale." It also speaks to how economics is often taught in a classroom. The typical introductory economics textbook waxes poetic about the power of markets and describes in detail how market forces work. Much less time goes into instances when they fail, and global warming surely ranks at the top of that list. Of course not every number generated by climate economists, or every policy pronouncement, will be conservative. But it's important to recognize the inherent delays and biases of the scientific enterprise as a whole. The same reasons why we can trust climate science overall leads to IPCC reports being inherently conservative in their overall assessment - and why climate economics has straggled behind in its policy recommendations.

Notes

Gernot Wagner writes the Risky Climate column for Bloomberg Green. This piece was first published by Bloomberg Opinion.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ECONOMICS (90%); GREEN ECONOMY (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); WRITERS (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (79%); AWARDS & PRIZES (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); HISTORY (78%); UNITED NATIONS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); DAMAGES (76%); CONSERVATISM (74%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

Organization: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (55%)

Industry: GREEN ECONOMY (90%); WRITERS (89%); PUBLISHING (73%)

Load-Date: September 24, 2021


End of Document


PA. MUST ACT NOW ON CLIMATE CHANGE, SENATE PANEL TOLD
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 29, 2018 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-2
Length: 699 words
Byline: Don Hopey  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Much of the testimony Wednesday before the state Senate Democratic Policy Committee focused on the need at the state and local level to take immediate action to mitigate climate change by reducing carbon emissions.
George Hartenstein, deputy director for waste, air, radiation and remediation in the state Department of Environmental Protection, was one of several speakers at the meeting in an IBEW Local No. 5 assembly room on the South Side who said Pennsylvania is already feeling ecological, economic and public health impacts from the changing climate.
Climate change is contributing to increased flooding, severe storms, heat waves and drought, Mr. Hartenstein testified. Average temperatures in the state could climb by 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit by 2050 unless greenhouse gas emissions are curtailed significantly, he said.
"If not properly addressed, changes in climate could result in more frequent road washouts, challenges in our transportation infrastructure, higher likelihood of power outages, and shifts in economic activity," Mr. Hartenstein said. Based on the overwhelming scientific evidence, he said, those harms are likely to increase in number and severity.
Mandy Warner, senior manager for climate and air policy for the Environmental Defense Fund, testified that Pennsylvania emits more greenhouse gases than all but two other states, and although those emissions are declining, they are not falling fast enough.
Scientists say greenhouse gases trap heat in the atmosphere, causing warming and other changes to the Earth's climate.
Ms. Warner said Pennsylvania has some of the dirtiest coal-fired power plants in the country and is the only state in the Northeast without a hard limit on carbon pollution from the power sector or any plan to put one in place.
Calls to reduce or end the use of coal to produce electricity generated pushback from Rachel Gleason, executive director of the Pennsylvania Coal Alliance. She said the continued burning of fossil fuels is the "key to prosperity," adding that neither wind nor solar can produce reliable, affordable electricity.
Kevin Sunday, director of government affairs for the Pennsylvania Chamber of Business and Industry, told the panel that the chamber believes "environmental stewardship and economic growth are mutually compatible objectives."
He also said that while the chamber recognizes that human activity is a major contributing factor in climate change, government officials should be "judicious" in taking actions that impact the state's coal and gas production or that prevent businesses and consumers from making choices "to develop and utilize the energy solution that works best for them."
State Sen. Lisa Boscola, D-Northampton/Lehigh and chair of the committee, said the policy committee's hearing was prompted by President Donald Trump's decision last year to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris Climate Accord and commitments to reduce the nation's emissions of greenhouse gases, including curbs on carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, perfluorocarbons and sulfur emissions, by 26 percent to 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025.
"We cannot ignore the scientific facts,"' Ms. Boscola said. "The future of our communities and all of our humanity depend on us taking action. We need to cut nonrenewable energy usage to zero by 2050."
She said the climate change problem is real, imminent and multifaceted, and political leaders have a responsibility to address it.
"We need to reduce carbon emissions. How we do that will take both immediate steps and a long-term focus," Ms. Boscola said.
State Sen. Jay Costa, D-Forest Hills, said that in the absence of federal action, the state must continue to participate and provide leadership in "cooperative efforts to stave off the catastrophic consequences of global warming."
Thomas Schuster, senior campaign representative for the Sierra Club in Pennsylvania, said the latest scientific reports contain a "sense of urgency," and noted that clean energy and efficiency have the potential to create hundreds of thousands of jobs in the state.
About 50 people attended the committee meeting and 12 provided testimony.
Don Hopey: 412-263-1983, dhopey@post-gazette.com Twitter @donhopey

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Darrell Sapp/Post-Gazette: State Sen. Lisa M. Boscola, D-Lehigh/Northampton, chairwoman of the state Senate Democratic Policy Committe, speaks Wednesday during a hearing on state and local efforts to address climate change. The hearing was held at IBEW Local No. 5 on the South Side. At right is state Sen. Jay Costa, D-Forest Hills.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GREENHOUSE GASES (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (89%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); FLOODS & FLOODING (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SEVERE WEATHER (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (78%); WEATHER (78%); AIR POLLUTION (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (77%); NITROGEN OXIDES (77%); CONSUMERS (76%); ECONOMICS (76%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (74%); CONSERVATION (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (71%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (71%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (67%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (66%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (63%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (62%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (60%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (60%)

Organization: ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE (55%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (88%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (88%); FOSSIL FUEL POWER PLANTS (86%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); COAL FIRED PLANTS (77%); METHANE (77%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (75%); POWER FAILURES (75%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (74%); NATURAL GAS (74%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (74%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (74%); PUBLISHING (73%); TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE (73%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (63%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%); EARTH (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: November 29, 2018


End of Document


PA. MUST ACT NOW ON CLIMATE CHANGE, SENATE PANEL TOLD
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 29, 2018 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-2
Length: 699 words
Byline: Don Hopey  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Much of the testimony Wednesday before the state Senate Democratic Policy Committee focused on the need at the state and local level to take immediate action to mitigate climate change by reducing carbon emissions.
George Hartenstein, deputy director for waste, air, radiation and remediation in the state Department of Environmental Protection, was one of several speakers at the meeting in an IBEW Local No. 5 assembly room on the South Side who said Pennsylvania is already feeling ecological, economic and public health impacts from the changing climate.
Climate change is contributing to increased flooding, severe storms, heat waves and drought, Mr. Hartenstein testified. Average temperatures in the state could climb by 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit by 2050 unless greenhouse gas emissions are curtailed significantly, he said.
"If not properly addressed, changes in climate could result in more frequent road washouts, challenges in our transportation infrastructure, higher likelihood of power outages, and shifts in economic activity," Mr. Hartenstein said. Based on the overwhelming scientific evidence, he said, those harms are likely to increase in number and severity.
Mandy Warner, senior manager for climate and air policy for the Environmental Defense Fund, testified that Pennsylvania emits more greenhouse gases than all but two other states, and although those emissions are declining, they are not falling fast enough.
Scientists say greenhouse gases trap heat in the atmosphere, causing warming and other changes to the Earth's climate.
Ms. Warner said Pennsylvania has some of the dirtiest coal-fired power plants in the country and is the only state in the Northeast without a hard limit on carbon pollution from the power sector or any plan to put one in place.
Calls to reduce or end the use of coal to produce electricity generated pushback from Rachel Gleason, executive director of the Pennsylvania Coal Alliance. She said the continued burning of fossil fuels is the "key to prosperity," adding that neither wind nor solar can produce reliable, affordable electricity.
Kevin Sunday, director of government affairs for the Pennsylvania Chamber of Business and Industry, told the panel that the chamber believes "environmental stewardship and economic growth are mutually compatible objectives."
He also said that while the chamber recognizes that human activity is a major contributing factor in climate change, government officials should be "judicious" in taking actions that impact the state's coal and gas production or that prevent businesses and consumers from making choices "to develop and utilize the energy solution that works best for them."
State Sen. Lisa Boscola, D-Northampton/Lehigh and chair of the committee, said the policy committee's hearing was prompted by President Donald Trump's decision last year to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris Climate Accord and commitments to reduce the nation's emissions of greenhouse gases, including curbs on carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, perfluorocarbons and sulfur emissions, by 26 percent to 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025.
"We cannot ignore the scientific facts,"' Ms. Boscola said. "The future of our communities and all of our humanity depend on us taking action. We need to cut nonrenewable energy usage to zero by 2050."
She said the climate change problem is real, imminent and multifaceted, and political leaders have a responsibility to address it.
"We need to reduce carbon emissions. How we do that will take both immediate steps and a long-term focus," Ms. Boscola said.
State Sen. Jay Costa, D-Forest Hills, said that in the absence of federal action, the state must continue to participate and provide leadership in "cooperative efforts to stave off the catastrophic consequences of global warming."
Thomas Schuster, senior campaign representative for the Sierra Club in Pennsylvania, said the latest scientific reports contain a "sense of urgency," and noted that clean energy and efficiency have the potential to create hundreds of thousands of jobs in the state.
About 50 people attended the committee meeting and 12 provided testimony.
Don Hopey: 412-263-1983, dhopey@post-gazette.com Twitter @donhopey

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Darrell Sapp/Post-Gazette: State Sen. Lisa M. Boscola, D-Lehigh/Northampton, chairwoman of the state Senate Democratic Policy Committe, speaks Wednesday during a hearing on state and local efforts to address climate change. The hearing was held at IBEW Local No. 5 on the South Side. At right is state Sen. Jay Costa, D-Forest Hills.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GREENHOUSE GASES (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (89%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); FLOODS & FLOODING (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SEVERE WEATHER (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (78%); WEATHER (78%); AIR POLLUTION (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (77%); NITROGEN OXIDES (77%); CONSUMERS (76%); ECONOMICS (76%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (74%); CONSERVATION (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (71%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (71%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (67%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (66%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (63%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (62%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (60%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (60%)

Organization: ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE (55%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (88%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (88%); FOSSIL FUEL POWER PLANTS (86%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); COAL FIRED PLANTS (77%); METHANE (77%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (75%); POWER FAILURES (75%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (74%); NATURAL GAS (74%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (74%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (74%); PUBLISHING (73%); TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE (73%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (63%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%); EARTH (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: November 29, 2018


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH HISTORY; IT HAS PRODUCED WARMING AND COOLING, PROSPERITY AND CITIES, WAR AND FAMINE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
January 8, 2015 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION; Pg. B-7
Length: 808 words
Body


We know, because they say so, that those who think catastrophic global warming is probable and perhaps imminent are exemplary empiricists. They say those who disagree with them are "climate change deniers" disrespectful of science.
Actually, however, something about which everyone can agree is that of course the climate is changing - it always is. And if climate Cassandras are as conscientious as they claim to be about weighing evidence, how do they accommodate historical evidence of enormously consequential episodes of climate change not produced by human activity? Before wagering vast wealth and curtailments of liberty on correcting the climate, two recent books should be considered.
In "The Third Horseman: Climate Change and the Great Famine of the 14th Century," William Rosen explains how Europe's "most widespread and destructive famine" was the result of "an almost incomprehensibly complicated mixture of climate, commerce and conflict, four centuries in gestation." Early in that century, 10 percent of the population from the Atlantic to the Urals died, partly because of the effect of climate change on "the incredible amalgam of molecules that comprises a few inches of soil that produces the world's food."
In the Medieval Warm Period from the end of the ninth century to the beginning of the 14th, the Northern Hemisphere was warmer than at any time in the last 8,000 years - for reasons concerning which there is no consensus. Warming increased the amount of arable land - there were vineyards in northern England - leading, Mr. Rosen says, to Europe's "first sustained population increase since the fall of the Roman Empire." The need for land on which to grow cereals drove deforestation. The MWP population explosion gave rise to towns, textile manufacturing and new wealthy classes.
Then, near the end of the MWP, came the severe winters of 1309-1312, when polar bears could walk from Greenland to Iceland on pack ice. In 1315 there was rain for perhaps 155 consecutive days, washing away topsoil. Upwards of half the arable land in much of Europe was gone; cannibalism arrived as parents ate children. Corpses hanging from gallows were devoured.
Human behavior did not cause this climate change. Instead, climate warming caused behavioral change (10 million mouths to feed became 30 million). Then climate cooling caused social changes (rebelliousness and bellicosity) that amplified the consequences of climate, a pattern repeated four centuries later.
In "Global Crisis: War, Climate Change & Catastrophe in the Seventeenth Century," Geoffrey Parker, a history professor at Ohio State University, explains how a "fatal synergy" between climatological and political factors produced turmoil from Europe to China. What he calls "the placenta of the crisis" of that century included "the Little Ice Age" between the 1640s and the 1690s. Unusual weather, protracted enough to qualify as a change in climate, correlated so strongly with political upheavals as to constitute causation.
Whatever caused the LIA - decreased sunspot activity and increased seismic activity were important factors - it caused, among other horrific things, "stunting" that, Mr. Parker says, "reduced the average height of those born in 1675, the 'year without a summer,' or during the years of cold and famine in the early 1690s, to only 63 inches: the lowest ever recorded."
In northerly latitudes, Mr. Parker says, each decline of 0.5 degrees Celsius in the mean summer temperature "decreases the number of days on which crops ripen by 10 percent, doubles the risk of a single harvest failure and increases the risk of a double failure sixfold." For those farming at least 1,000 feet above sea level, this temperature decline "increases the chance of two consecutive failures a hundredfold."
The flight from abandoned farms to cities produced "the urban graveyard effect," crises of disease, nutrition, water, sanitation, housing, fire, crime, abortion, infanticide, marriages forgone and suicide. Given the ubiquity of desperation, it is not surprising that more wars took place during the 17th-century crisis "than in any other era before the Second World War."
By documenting the appalling consequences of two climate changes, Messrs. Rosen and Parker validate wariness about behaviors that might cause changes.
The last 12 of Mr. Parker's 712 pages of text deliver a scalding exhortation to be alarmed about what he considers preventable global warming. Neither book, however, supports those who believe human behavior is the sovereign or even primary disrupter of climate normality, whatever that might be.
With the hands that today's climate Cassandras are not using to pat themselves on the back for their virtuous empiricism, they should pick up such books.
George F. Will is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post (georgewill@washpost.com).
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); FAMINE (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); POPULATION GROWTH (89%); ARTS & HUMANITIES EDUCATION (77%); BEHAVIOR & COGNITION (77%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (77%); HISTORY (77%); SOCIAL SCIENCE EDUCATION (77%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (75%); DEFORESTATION (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)

Industry: FAMINE (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); MANUFACTURING (77%); PUBLISHING (74%); DEFORESTATION (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); TEXTILE MFG (50%)

Geographic: OHIO, USA (79%); EUROPE (94%); CHINA (79%); ENGLAND (79%); ICELAND (79%)

Load-Date: January 8, 2015


End of Document


WHY DO DEMOCRATS SHOW SUCH DISDAIN FOR NUCLEAR POWER?; UNTIL THEY EMBRACE NUCLEAR ENERGY AS ONE WAY TO DECARBONIZE THE PLANET, THEY CAN'T BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
June 1, 2019 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION; Pg. WB-3
Length: 779 words
Body


Climate change is the No. 1 issue for Democrats. A recent poll showed 82 percent of Democratic voters listing it as their top priority. To appeal to those voters, contenders for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination routinely call climate change an "existential threat" to the nation and world. But amid their rhetoric and promises of massively expensive plans to tackle the problem, these same Democrats - with the notable exception of Sen. Cory Booker - steadfastly refuse to utter two critical words: nuclear power.
br data-css-regions-fragment-of="1938">
The Democrats' disdain for nuclear energy deserves attention, because there is no credible pathway toward large-scale decarbonization that doesn't include lots of it. That fact was reinforced Tuesday, when the International Energy Agency published a report declaring that without more nuclear energy, global carbon dioxide emissions will surge and "efforts to transition to a cleaner energy system will become drastically harder and more costly."
How costly? The IEA estimates that "$1.6 trillion in additional investment would be required in the electricity sector in advanced economies from 2018 to 2040" if the use of nuclear energy continued to decline. That, in turn, would mean higher prices, as "electricity supply costs would be close to $80 billion higher per year on average for advanced economies as a whole."
The report makes it clear that solar and wind energy cannot fill the gap left by the decline of the nuclear sector. Among the reasons cited by the Paris-based agency is land-use conflicts, a problem that is evident in Europe and across the U.S. The IEA says that "resistance to siting wind and, to a lesser extent, solar farms is a major obstacle to scaling up renewables capacity."
To take one example, last month, in Illinois, the Dewitt County Board voted against a wind project that would have covered more than 12,000 acres of land with 67 wind turbines standing nearly 600 feet high. By my count, since 2015, about 230 government entities from Maine to California have moved to reject or restrict wind projects. And an increasing number of rural communities are fighting large solar projects, too, in part, they claim, because the projects would eat up agricultural land and potentially reduce the value of homes.
Meanwhile, as communities fight the encroachment of large-scale renewable projects, the U.S. is facing a wave of nuclear-reactor retirements. Nine reactors in the U.S. are slated to be retired over the next three years, and the IEA estimates that domestic nuclear capacity could shrink by more than half in the next 20 years. The agency points to the many challenges facing the nuclear sector, including increased regulations, low-cost natural gas and competition from subsidized renewables.
And yet, you have Democratic presidential contenders taking positions on nuclear power like that of Beto O'Rourke. He has dubbed climate change "our greatest threat" and says he will "mobilize $5 trillion" to cut domestic greenhouse-gas emissions to zero by 2050. The word "nuclear" does not appear anywhere on his website, just as it's absent from nearly every other Democratic candidate's site.
That's a shame, because the IEA report is just the latest in a long line of scientific papers pointing to the need for nuclear energy. In 2014, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change declared that achieving deep cuts in emissions will "require more intensive use" of low-emission technologies "such as renewable energy [and] nuclear energy."
This is one of the biggest and longest-running disconnects in American politics: The leaders of the Democratic Party insist that the U.S. must make big cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions because of the threat posed by climate change, but for nearly five decades, they have either ignored or professed outright opposition to nuclear energy. The last time the party's platform contained a positive statement about nuclear power was way back in 1972.
br data-css-regions-fragment-of="1947">
America's top Democrats repeatedly tout the need for "clean" energy and massive deployments of wind and solar power, but by denying the role that nuclear energy must play in any successful decarbonization efforts, they are ignoring the scientific consensus. If they truly care about the dangers posed by climate change, they should stand up and tell the truth about the need for nuclear energy. Until that happens, their various plans to address the issue will be impossible to take seriously.
Robert Bryce is a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute. He wrote this for National Review. Copyright 2019 National Review.
br data-css-regions-fragment-of="1950">

Graphic

 
PHOTO: MediaNews Group: The Limerick Generating Station located next to the Schuylkill River in Limerick Township.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: VOTERS & VOTING (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); WIND POWER PLANTS (88%); SOLAR POWER INDUSTRY (87%); WIND ENERGY INDUSTRY (87%); EMISSIONS (79%); GREENHOUSE GASES (79%); POLLS & SURVEYS (79%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); LAND USE PLANNING (77%); LAND USE & DEVELOPMENT (76%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (71%); PRICES (71%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (67%); HOME PRICES (65%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

Organization: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY (83%)

Industry: ENERGY & UTILITIES (93%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (90%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (89%); NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (89%); SOLAR ENERGY (89%); WIND ENERGY (89%); WIND POWER PLANTS (88%); SOLAR POWER INDUSTRY (87%); WIND ENERGY INDUSTRY (87%); EMISSIONS (79%); PUBLISHING (78%); LAND USE PLANNING (77%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (76%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (76%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (71%); NATURAL GAS (71%); HOME PRICES (65%)

Person: CORY BOOKER (78%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: June 1, 2019


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE TO BOOST HEALTH PROBLEMS; CONFERENCE HINTS AT IMPACT ON PA.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 26, 2014 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A-11
Length: 885 words
Byline: Don Hopey, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Climate change: Now it's personal.
There will be more itching, sneezing, swelling and gasping for breath as Pennsylvania's climate shifts and residents are exposed to more poison ivy, stinging insects, pollen allergies and lyme-disease-bearing ticks, and experience increased asthma, respiratory disease and heat-related deaths.
That was the assessment of scientists and physicians at a one-day climate change conference sponsored by the Allegheny County Health Department and the University of Pittsburgh's Graduate School of Public Health last week.
They said a silver lining is that Pennsylvanians won't see the worst of those negative impacts until after 2050. But the bad news, echoing the findings contained in the third U.S. National Climate Assessment released May 6, is that the changes already have begun.
And, they agreed, the negative consequences of climate change brought on by man-made emissions of greenhouse gases will worsen the longer the world waits to reduce those emissions.
Raymond Najjar, a professor of oceanography in the Meteorology Department at Penn State University and an author of the 2009 Pennsylvania Climate Impact Assessment, said the most recent assessment released three weeks ago shows "some climate change is unavoidable," and the state will get warmer and wetter. Heavy downpours will be more intense and more frequent.
He predicted that unless Pennsylvania cuts its emissions of greenhouse gases -- including nitrogen oxides, carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and volatile organic compounds -- to 20 percent of what they are now, the state's summer heat index will become 8 to 10 degrees warmer by the end of this century.
Without that level of emissions cuts, the number of days the temperature tops 90 degrees Fahrenheit each year will increase from 10 to 65 and Pennsylvania's climate will resemble what is found now in northern Alabama.
"Pennsylvania has not done enough to reduce emissions and support renewable energy sources," said Mr. Najjar, adding that even if emissions are reduced by 80 percent, Pennsylvania likely will see summer temperatures rise by 5 degrees Fahrenheit, giving it a climate resembling that of southern Kentucky today.
City and county officials must start now to adapt policies and programs to climate-altered and expanding public health needs, said Karen Hacker, Allegheny County Health Department director.
"Infectious diseases, ticks, mosquitoes will all increase as the climate warms, as will severity and incidence of asthma, water problems and severe weather," Dr. Hacker said. "The increases will likely be incremental, but the impacts will collectively be bigger."
Leonard Bielory, a professor at Rutgers University where he is studying the impact of a warming climate on allergies, said globally longer pollination seasons are expected to increase the duration of exposure and also the number of individuals who develop sensitivity to it.
"Ragweed is responding to climate change on a continental basis, so we're seeing earlier and later pollen seasons and it moves northward with warmer climate," he said. "By 2020, we expect to see pollen increase by 20 percent in Pennsylvania, and by 2050 sensitivity to allergens could double from what it is now."
Dr. Bielory said research shows climate change is also likely to cause an increase in dust mites, stinging insects and cockroaches. The production of poison ivy oil, which causes the itchy skin rash, will increase as carbon dioxide levels rise, weed growth will be stimulated and peanut allergies, which have doubled in each of the last several decades, will continue to increase.
Lyme disease, the most prevalent vector-borne disease in the U.S. with 30,000 diagnosed and perhaps nine times more undiagnosed cases, also is likely to increase among humans as the geographic range of the tick that causes it continues to expand, according to Dustin Brisson, an associate professor of biology at the University of Pennsylvania, whose research involves evolutionary biology, molecular genetics and microbial ecology.
Peter Adams, a professor of civil and environmental engineering and engineering and public policy at Carnegie Mellon University, said warmer air temperatures combined with expected higher humidity "makes the atmosphere more able to do chemistry and produce compounds that could impact human health."
One of those compounds likely to increase is ground-level ozone, the primary component of unhealthy smog. Methane emissions from increased shale gas drilling, along with nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compound emissions from drilling operations and increased truck traffic, also could rise.
"Depending on how tightly those [shale gas drilling] operations are controlled," Mr. Adams said, "there could be significant health impacts on Pittsburgh and Philadelphia and even more significantly in the center of the state."
Clifford Mitchell, director of the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, said that mitigation policies are important and the public needs to get involved to force emissions reductions, but health officials need to plan now for how a changing climate will impact local populations and communities.
"We need to help people adapt," Dr. Mitchell said. "We're going to be doing damage control and we need to figure out how to do that systematically."

Notes

Don Hopey: dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983. /
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (90%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); ALLERGIES (89%); ASTHMA (89%); HAY FEVER (89%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); INSECTS & ARACHNIDS (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); METEOROLOGY (79%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (79%); WEATHER (79%); COUNTIES (78%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (78%); DISEASE AGENTS & VECTORS (77%); LYME DISEASE (77%); POLLINATION (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); OCEANOGRAPHY (74%); SEVERE WEATHER (74%); DEATH & DYING (73%); NITROGEN OXIDES (73%); WRITERS (73%); HEAT STRESS DISORDERS (72%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (72%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (72%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%); CITY GOVERNMENT (71%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (71%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (71%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (70%); VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS (68%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (67%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH (57%); PENN STATE UNIVERSITY (55%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (90%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); PUBLISHING (74%); WRITERS (73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%); SPONSORSHIP (72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (70%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (67%); ORGANIC CHEMICALS (64%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (50%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (96%); ALABAMA, USA (79%)

Load-Date: May 27, 2014


End of Document


WE MUST MONITOR CLIMATE CHANGE;
VESTED INTERESTS WANT TO DISMISS INFORMED INQUIRY. BUT WE CANNOT WAIT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 14, 2000, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 700 words
Byline: M. GRANGER MORGAN
Body


Slap on the blinders and ignore the possibility of climate change. That, in a nutshell, has been the reaction of many critics to a draft report titled "Climate Change Impacts on the United States" that was released for public review June 12.
The report was produced under congressional mandate, by a broad interdisciplinary team of 14 experts, appointed by the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. The 145-page report is based on the panel's own expert knowledge and on the work of hundreds of other experts and citizens who have worked together in groups all across the country for the past several years.
Carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere continue to rise because the world is burning more and more coal and oil. That increase is causing climate to change in ways that are only partly understood. The report poses an important "what if" question -- what would be the likely impacts on different regions of the United States, and on important sectors of our economy, if the climate changes in some of the ways experts now think are likely?
To read some of the hostile commentary that this draft report has generated, you would think its conclusions were radical in the extreme. Yet this honest look at the possibility of climate change reports most of its findings as possibilities, not certainties, and it carefully explores the many uncertainties.
It concludes that, for the United States as a whole, over the coming centur, economic impacts from a plausible range of climate change will probably be modest. However, some regions might be seriously harmed, while others could benefit. The report is more pessimistic about ecological impacts, arguing that some could be very substantial.
The critics object to exploring such "what if" questions. They believe that it is inappropriate to even talk about possible impacts until every last uncertainty about what will happen to the climate has been resolved, and we can make iron-clad predictions. Because that level of understanding is unlikely to be reached before the climate has actually changed, theirs is a prescription to put on blinders and do nothing.
This may be good short-term politics. It serves the economic interests of parties who would like to forestall any serious discussion of how to limit emission of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere for as long as possible. But it does not serve the U.S. national interest.
Almost all reputable scientists now believe that the continued atmospheric build-up of carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases" has begun to change the climate and will change it in significant ways over the decades to come. Many corporate and other leaders now share this view. No one can say precisely what the changes or their impacts will be, but the National Assessment details many things we can probably look forward to:
A New England with few if any sugar maples and a diminished ski industry; increased overall agricultural productivity but lower yields and water shortages in some regions; storm-induced flooding of coastal infrastructure such as tunnels and airports in New York; the complete loss of certain sensitive ecosystems "such as alpine meadows in the Rocky Mountains and some barrier islands"; and an Arctic Ocean completely without summer sea ice.
If these are serious possibilities, it makes sense to start thinking about them, and begin contingency planning now, even if we can't be precise about the timing or other details.
The entire report is available for public comment on the web at www.gcrio.org. It is written in clear nontechnical English and has many helpful illustrations.
Don't let the self-interested critics shape your understanding of what climate change may mean for the United States. Take a look for yourself -now, or when the final report comes out in printed form this autumn.
It is time for us all to take off the blinders when it comes to thinking about the possible impacts of climate change.
M. Granger Morgan is head of the Department of Engineering and Public Policy at Carnegie Mellon University. He is a member of the National Assessment Synthesis Team of the U.S. National Assessment of the Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (77%); ECONOMICS (77%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (77%); SCIENCE POLICY (77%)

Company: OFFICE OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY POLICY  (57%)

Organization: OFFICE OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY POLICY  (57%)

Industry: ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (90%); EMISSIONS (78%); PUBLISHING (74%)

Geographic: NORTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 15, 2000


End of Document


PITTSBURGH AND PARIS; WHAT I LEARNED AT THE CLIMATE-CHANGE SUMMIT IN FRANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 19, 2015 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; FIRST PERSON; Pg. A-7
Length: 720 words
Byline: Kyle Gracey
Body


Ah, Pittsburgh! You are a rusty city like ours!"
I'm sitting in Paris, talking with a man named Antoine. Antoine is from a small city in another part of France. His city used to be an industrial powerhouse but now has fallen on hard times. His only knowledge of Pittsburgh before meeting me was that my city was in similar shape. It's not, and for the climate-change agreement just reached in Paris, it can't afford to be.
I went to Paris to advocate for an agreement. I also went to understand Pittsburgh's role in it.
My parents worked in the coal industry, and my relatives worked at the University of Pittsburgh and in the mayor's office. So, both climate change and Pittsburgh's place in the world were on my mind from an early age. In fact, as a millennial, climate change has been with me all my life. I'll live long enough to suffer its worst consequences, and maybe to see it stopped.
In Paris, I was part of a huge coalition of people from all over the United States - faith leaders, scientists and business owners, among others - to help stop it sooner. While we didn't get everything we'd hoped for out of the agreement, I came away with some key lessons:
The era of fossil fuels is ending. To achieve the limits on global warming set out in the Paris agreement, the world will have to rapidly cut greenhouse-gas pollution and phase in 100 percent renewable energy, probably before 2050. Investing in coal, oil and natural gas no longer makes sense. While in Paris, we learned that investors around the world, holding more than $3.4 trillion, have now agreed to divest from fossil fuels. This commitment has grown 50-fold in just over a year.
Pittsburgh can help implement the Paris agreement. Contrary to Antoine's perception, Pittsburgh is a thriving city full of amazing innovations. From the research that comes out of our universities to the products developed in our startup community, Pittsburgh will be part of the solution to climate change. Mayor Bill Peduto also was in Paris, attending the Climate Summit for Local Leaders with mayors from 1,000 cities around the world. Their declaration included a call for transitioning to 100 percent renewable energy.
Separately, 353 local U.S. elected officials from 46 states issued a public letter to President Barack Obama calling for 100 percent clean energy by 2050. Councilwomen Natalia Rudiak of Pittsburgh, Fawn Walker-Montgomery of McKeesport and Marita Garrett of Wilkinsburg were among those who signed it. The strong emissions targets of the Paris agreement mean new opportunities and new responsibilities for Pittsburgh businesses and governments. We might not be a "rusty city," but there's still much more we can become.
We need a just transition. Moving to a clean-energy future should not leave anyone behind. Everyone should benefit from the shift away from fossil fuels, including the people who work in those industries. Recently, the Blue-Green Alliance of labor and environmental leaders produced a report on how Pennsylvania coal country can transition to clean energy in a way that provides opportunities for workers.
We must prepare for climate impacts. Climate change is a slow-moving process. Even with strong action, it will get worse before it gets better. As a city, we have to prepare. A few warm days in December might be nice. The summer heat waves, severe storms and flooding expected to come our way over the next few decades won't be. Building resilience to climate impacts will be essential. That means improving and repairing our infrastructure and making plans to protect people from increasingly severe weather.
Fortunately, Pittsburgh is ahead of many cities. We're a part of the 100 Resilient Cities Network and have a chief resilience officer to help us plan for and protect against major challenges like climate change. Climate resilience is a job for everyone, though, from homeowners to major companies. All of us have a role to play in strengthening our response to what climate change will throw at us.
If my time in Paris taught me anything, it was that Pittsburgh is ahead of the game in responding to climate change. I also learned how much more work is coming our way. As a young professional, this gives me tremendous hope for both my own life in our great city and for Pittsburgh's contribution to this global struggle.

Notes

Kyle Gracey is working on a graduate degree in engineering and public policy at Carnegie Mellon University.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); AGREEMENTS (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); RENEWABLE ENERGY INDUSTRY (89%); MAYORS (88%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (86%); CITIES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (77%); EMISSIONS (74%); GREENHOUSE GASES (74%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (74%); CITY LIFE (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); GLOBAL WARMING (72%); MILLENNIUM (68%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (64%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (60%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (60%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH (56%)

Industry: ENERGY & UTILITIES (89%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (89%); RENEWABLE ENERGY INDUSTRY (89%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (86%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (86%); EMISSIONS (74%); NATURAL GAS (74%); PUBLISHING (74%); GLOBAL WARMING (72%); COAL INDUSTRY (69%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (94%); PARIS, FRANCE (92%); FRANCE (91%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: December 22, 2015


End of Document


GORE SHARES PEACE PRIZE; PRAISED FOR SPREADING WORD ON MAN-MADE CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 13, 2007 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-1
Length: 907 words
Byline: WALTER GIBBS AND SARAH LYALL, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: OSLO, Norway 
Body


Former Vice President Al Gore, who emerged from his loss in the muddled 2000 presidential election to devote himself to his passion as an environmental crusader, yesterday was awarded the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize, sharing it with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a U.N. network of scientists.
The Norwegian Nobel Committee praised both "for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change."
The prize is a vindication for Mr. Gore, whose frightening, cautionary film about the consequences of climate change, "An Inconvenient Truth," won the 2007 Academy Award for best documentary, even as conservatives in the United States denounced it as alarmist and exaggerated.
"I will accept this award on behalf of all the people that have been working so long and so hard to try to get the message out about this planetary emergency," Mr. Gore said in a brief appearance yesterday in Palo Alto, Calif., standing with his wife, Tipper, and four U.N. climate panel members. "I'm going back to work right now. This is just the beginning."
The award was also a validation for the U.N. panel, which in its early days was vilified by those who disputed the scientific case for a human role in climate change. In New Delhi, the Indian climatologist who heads the panel, Rajendra K. Pachauri, said science had won out over skepticism.
Mr. Gore, a vociferous opponent of the Bush administration on a range of issues, including the Iraq war, is the second Democratic Party politician from the United States to win the peace prize this decade. Former President Jimmy Carter won in 2002.
Mr. Carter, himself a critic of President Bush, was 78 when he won the prize. But Mr. Gore is just 59 and an active presence in American politics, if only as a large thorn in Mr. Bush's side -- and in the side of Democrats worried that he might challenge them for the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination.
Mr. Gore, who lost the 2000 election to Mr. Bush after a bitter electoral dispute that had to be resolved by the Supreme Court, has regularly said he will not run for president again. But yesterday's announcement touched off renewed interest in his plans.
Upon hearing the news, White House spokesman Tony Fratto did not go overboard in his praise. "Of course, we're happy for Vice President Gore and the IPCC for receiving this recognition," he said.
In Oslo, Ole Danbolt Mjoes, chairman of the peace committee, was asked whether the award could be interpreted as criticism of the Bush administration and the United States, which did not subscribe to the Kyoto treaty to cap greenhouse emissions. He replied that the Nobel was not meant to be a "kick in the leg to anyone" -- the Norwegian expression for "kick in the teeth."
"We would encourage all countries, including the big countries, and challenge them to think again and to say what they can do to conquer global warming," Mr. Mjoes said in a news conference in Oslo. "The bigger the powers, the better that they come in front of this."
The four other members of the peace committee generally refuse to comment on the thinking behind the award, which in recent years has moved toward issues at a degree of remove from armed conflict, like social justice, poverty remediation and environmentalism. But in a phone interview, Berge Furre, one of the four, said, "I hope this will have an effect on the attitudes of Americans as well as people in other countries."
In its formal citation, the Nobel committee called Mr. Gore "probably the single individual who has done most to create greater worldwide understanding of the measures that need to be adopted." It praised the U.N. panel, which is made up of 2,000 scientists and is considered the world's leading authority on climate change, for creating "an ever-broader informed consensus about the connection between human activities and global warming."
While the world's major environmental groups all heaped praise on Mr. Gore for his role in raising public awareness, they lauded the panel for, in the words of Greenpeace International, "meticulous scientific work."
The two approaches, however different, both play a part, scientists said yesterday. The Nobel Prize "is honoring the science and the publicity, and they're necessarily different," said American Institute of Physics historian Spencer R. Weart, author of the recent book "The Discovery of Global Warming."
Mr. Gore announced that he would give his portion of the $1.5 million prize money to the Alliance for Climate Protection, a nonprofit organization he founded last year. He said he was honored to share the prize with the U.N. panel, calling it "the world's pre-eminent scientific body devoted to improving our understanding of the climate crisis."
Mr. Pachauri said, "The message that it sends is that the Nobel Prize committee realized the value of knowledge in tackling the problem of climate change." He said the award was an acknowledgment of the panel's "impartial and objective assessment of climate change."
The climate panel, established in 1988, has issued a series of increasingly grim reports in the last two decades assessing scientific, technological and economic issues surrounding climate change. It is expected to issue another report in the next few months, before the U.N. Climate Change Conference in Indonesia on Dec. 3. Some 180 countries are to begin negotiations there on a successor to the Kyoto Protocol, which expires in 2012.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jeff Chiu/Associated Press: Former Vice President Al Gore smiles after speaking at a news conference in Palo Alto, Calif., about winning the Nobel Peace Prize.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: AWARDS & PRIZES (93%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); NOBEL PRIZES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICS (78%); ACADEMY AWARDS (77%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); UNITED NATIONS (77%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (75%); CONSERVATISM (73%); EMISSIONS (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); VOTERS & VOTING (73%); GREENHOUSE GASES (72%); SUPREME COURTS (60%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS (91%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (58%)

Industry: ACADEMY AWARDS (77%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (77%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (75%); EMISSIONS (73%); PUBLISHING (73%)

Person: AL GORE (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); JIMMY CARTER (58%)

Geographic: OSLO, NORWAY (74%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (56%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (54%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (95%); NORWAY (93%); INDIA (79%); IRAQ (79%)

Load-Date: October 16, 2007


End of Document


THE EROSION OF EASTER ISLAND; THE FAMOUS MOAI ARE THREATENED BY CLIMATE CHANGE, WRITES BILL ZLATOS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 7, 2019 Sunday
EAST EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: E; Pg. E-7
Length: 1387 words
Body


Rapa Nui National Park, Easter Island
I stared in wonder at these wonders of centuries past. Stone statues up to 40 feet tall and 75 tons stand with oversized heads, their bodies pocked and weathered by water, wind and time. Stoic faces with sunken eyes and pursed lips look as though they are holding secrets that they will never reveal.
I was visiting one of the most remote inhabited outposts in the world. Easter Island, or Rapa Nui as the Polynesians call it, lies 2,200 miles west of Chile, which owns it. About 900 statues, or moai, ring the island, some on stone platforms called ahu. Like icebergs, most of the statues' mass hides below the surface.
To gaze at these giants is to wonder how a modern Stone Age people with no knowledge of the wheel could move them from the volcano where they were carved to various sites perhaps miles away. I learned a week after my return to Pittsburgh, however, that there is a more important question: How long will the world still be able to admire these monoliths before the sea claims them?
Precarious future
Jane Downes lives 8,400 miles from Easter Island, but she knows more about its fate than most experts.
That's because Ms. Downes, an archaeologist at the University of the Highlands and Islands in Scotland, can see the damage caused by rising tides and violent storms on 3,000 prehistoric sites, some predating the Egyptian pyramids, on the coast of the Orkney Islands where she works.
Ms. Downes has visited Easter Island six times in 10 years, most recently in January. She has seen how the sea has damaged some statues and platforms and predicts other statues will fall, too, as victims of climate change.
"The statues and platforms are almost all on the coast, so they are all threatened by sea level rise and storminess, both of which are caused by climate change," she said. The rising sea level and greater storms cause water to undercut and overtop the rock of the statues and platforms, wearing it away. The rising sea also floods the coast and erodes the cliffs on which many of the monuments precariously rest.
"You can actually see big chunks of them falling into the sea," Ms. Downes said. Complicating the problem is that the platforms are tombs containing the incinerated bones of early ancestors. In some cases, the sea has opened up the walls of the platforms and exposed the bones.
Ms. Downes co-authored the Easter Island section of a 2016 report, "World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate," produced by UNESCO, the Union of Concerned Scientists and the United Nations Environment Programme. The fate of the statues is important to the island's economy, the report states. With only about 5,000 residents, the island teems with 60,000 tourists a year.
If a hurricane hit a cultural site in preindustrial times, it would not be as devastating as it would be today, said Brenda Ekwurzel, director of climate science for the Union of Concerned Scientists and a former resident of Squirrel Hill. "What used to be a drizzle is likely to be a torrential downpour today," she added.
Scientists predict that by the end of the century "storm waves (that) batter Easter Island could reach 3.6 feet higher than today," Ms. Ekwurzel said.
Ms. Downes said the threat to Easter Island is on par with many other World Heritage sites but not as dire as the bleaching of the Great Barrier Reef. She attended a recent conference on how to save the heritage of Easter Island. Two options are creating barriers around the monuments or moving them inland. Some critics oppose the latter because it would remove the statues from their context. Ms. Downes favors a third option -working with the local community to save the monuments.
Imperiled harmony
I joined a tour led by my guide, Nune Huke, to explore this dot in the southeastern Pacific. Escaping war, earthquakes and tsunamis, the first people arrived here from Polynesia more than a thousand years ago in double canoes. I marveled at the courage and navigational skill of those first settlers. They crossed 3,000 miles of open sea in fragile boats to reach a speck about the size of Pittsburgh.
The first king, Hotu Matu'a, divided the island among his six children, according to legend. The Rapa Nui people lived in stone houses facing the sea. They first made the statues in about 1100 A.D. and positioned them to face inland to watch over the people.
As I followed the path, giant statues sprouted from the gentle hillside against the backdrop of the vast Pacific. Just heads and shoulders usually showed above ground unless they rested on platforms. Lone statues stood erect, leaned or toppled over. The eyes of some were often missing, and statues of chiefs wore reddish headdresses and topknots.
The expression of the statues was not serene as much as somber. Still, the spirituality of the statues moved me.
Our tour continued uphill to the crater, Rano Raraku. Here workers quarried a soft compacted ash called tuff and carved the statues with hard basalt tools.
Ms. Huke said some people believe that workers used trees to make "sleds" for moving the statues from the quarry. Workers also moved the standing statues by rocking them with ropes. However, the use of timber for sleds, firewood and canoes contributed to the deforestation of the island, as did beetles.
Food eventually became scarce with overpopulation and dwindling resources. As a result, the people quit feeding the workers making the statues.
"The carvers said, 'No more food, no more statues, because we work for food,'" Ms. Huke said. Lying in the quarry are the last statues made at Easter Island -all unfinished. Disgruntled carvers abandoned their axes and knives there.
I was essentially looking at the site of an early workers' strike.
Enter the Birdman
In an annual contest, a representative of each tribe climbed down a 1,000-foot cliff and swam a mile to the largest of three rocky islets. The winner, called the Birdman, was first to find and bring back an egg from the nests of migratory birds. His tribe would lead the island until the next year's ritual -a less bloody alternative to war.
Standing above the cliff, I surveyed the distance to the islet and the swirling, shark-infested sea. I felt glad not to compete for Birdman
The development of the Birdman culture marked a shift in Rapa Nui society. Their new diet focused on the eggs of sea birds. The people did not eat all the eggs, leaving enough to hatch and return the following year.
I asked Ms. Huke what people today can learn from Easter Island.
She said the Rapa Nui learned to change their beliefs. Their chief and priest had encouraged them to build colossal likenesses of their ancestors to protect them. But, she continued, the centuries spent making statues used up precious resources. The people eventually turned to the meritocracy of the Birdman, leaving enough food for their continued survival.
The bottom line, Ms. Huke said, is "they learned that with harmony they could produce food and life."
At no time during the tour, however, did I learn that the sea was threatening the statues and platforms. Our path generally led past statues that were not so close to the ocean that they looked in peril.
Upon reading of the impending disaster in The New York Times, I contacted the Chilean government. I learned that its Ministry of the Environment is studying the impact of climate change on the island up to the year 2050 and is developing an action plan to address it.
"The island of Rapa Nui, because of its condition, is even more vulnerable and climate change can have many impacts," according to a statement from ministry spokeswoman Macarena Villarino Herrara.
Our group stopped at Anakena, a white sandy beach and the traditional site where the first king and settlers landed. A row of statues atop a platform stood nearby.
I was without my swimming trunks, but the blue Pacific looked inviting. I waded into the water in my clothes and immersed myself. The warm water washed over and soothed me like baptism.
In retrospect, though, I wonder how long before those seemingly tranquil waves pound the platform like a battering ram and spread the bones of ancestors on the shore. How long until the incessant waves make these magnificent monuments tumble?
And how long before we do something about it?
Bill Zlatos (billzlatos@gmail.com) is a freelance writer living in Ross.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); SCULPTURE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); COASTAL AREAS (89%); NATIONAL PARKS (89%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (89%); HISTORIC SITES (78%); ISLANDS & REEFS (78%); THREATENED & SENSITIVE SPECIES (77%); UNITED NATIONS (77%); TROPICAL STORMS (73%); GLACIERS & ICEBERGS (72%); HURRICANES (72%); CUSTOMS & CULTURAL HERITAGE (70%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (65%); ARCHAEOLOGY (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%)

Industry: SCULPTURE (90%); NATIONAL PARKS (89%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (89%); HISTORIC SITES (78%); PUBLISHING (73%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (79%); SCOTLAND (79%)

Load-Date: April 7, 2019


End of Document


REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE DEPICTS A PLANET IN PERIL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 17, 2013 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 787 words
Byline: Tony Barboza, Los Angeles Times
Body


Climate change will disrupt not only the natural world but society, posing risks to the world's economy, the food and water supply and contributing to violent conflict, an international panel of scientists says.
The warnings came in a report drafted by the United Nations-backed Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The 29-page summary, leaked and posted on a blog critical of the panel, has been distributed to governments around the world for review. It could change before it is released in March.
"We see a wide range of impacts that have already occurred ... on people, ecosystems and economies," said Chris Field, a scientist at the Carnegie Institution for Science and co-chairman of the group writing the report. "Looking into the future, we see increasing risks that are more pervasive and more severe with greater amounts of climate change."
Mr. Field and an IPCC spokesman confirmed the draft's authenticity. "This is a close-to-final work in progress," Mr. Field said.
The report describes a planet in peril as a result of the human-caused buildup of greenhouse gases since the Industrial Revolution, where glaciers are shrinking and plants and animals have shifted their ranges in response to rising temperatures. As global warming continues through the 21st century, many species will face greater risk of extinction, marine life will shift toward the poles and seawater will grow more acidic, the report says.
By 2100, hundreds of millions of people in coastal areas will be flooded or displaced by rising sea levels. The arid subtropics will have less fresh water, leading to more competition for resources.
The global food supply is also at risk, with yields of wheat, rice, corn and other major crops projected to drop by as much as 2 percent each decade for the rest of the century, even as demand rises.
Among the other risks forecast in the report: Extreme heat waves that will be especially deadly in urban areas, where a growing population will also contend with severe storms, flooding and drought. Rural areas will cope with less drinking and irrigation water and less productive farming.
Global surface temperature has risen about 1.5 degrees since 1880 as greenhouse gases have accumulated in the atmosphere from burning fossil fuels, industrial activity, agriculture and deforestation. Cutting emissions could ease the rate of change, but not until the second half of the century, the report says.
The report "brings this issue home and it shows us why it's important," said Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University who did not contribute to the assessment. "The reason we care about climate change is because it affects us: It affects our food, our water, our health, our roads, buildings and infrastructure and our natural environment."
Climate change alone isn't the cause of most of the ill effects. Rather, it worsens them by interacting with other factors, such as population growth, urbanization and exploitation of natural resources.
The panel sees the changing climate slowing down economic growth and worsening poverty, hunger and disease.
The report also says climate change increases the risk of violence and civil war.
Some low-lying countries will see their territorial integrity challenged by rising sea levels The shifting of water supply, sea ice and fish stocks across international boundaries has "the potential to increase rivalry among states," the report says.
In one section, the report breaks down the effects on specific regions. Among the greatest risks to North America, for instance, are wildfires, heat-related deaths and coastal flooding. Africa is threatened by water shortages, famine and disease as temperatures rise and rainfall patterns shift.
The IPCC, created in 1988, has issued five major assessments of the science of climate change, each including a report on its effects. Hundreds of scientists from across the world collect and summarize thousands of peer-reviewed studies to come to a consensus every five or six years.
In September, the panel predicted that the planet will warm between 2.7 degrees and 8.1 degrees if carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere double, and that sea levels will rise 10 inches to 32 inches by century's end. For the first time, the panel also endorsed a limit on the amount of carbon that can be emitted before the temperature rises more than 3.6 degrees and the worst effects of climate change set in.
The U.N.'s World Meteorological Organization announced Wednesday that the rise in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere accelerated to a record high in 2012. Carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping gas, was responsible for 80 percent of the jump, pushing concentrations to levels not seen in at least 800,000 years.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Joe Raedle/Getty Images: The village of Ilulissat, Greenland, is seen near the icebergs that broke off from the Jakobshavn Glacier.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); LIFE FORMS (90%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); POPULATION GROWTH (89%); WATER RESOURCES (89%); DROUGHT (79%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (79%); EMISSIONS (79%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (79%); FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); HEAT WAVES (79%); SEVERE WEATHER (79%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); SALTWATER ECOSYSTEMS (75%); DEFORESTATION (74%); GLACIERS & ICEBERGS (74%); UNITED NATIONS (74%); WATER QUALITY (74%); WEATHER (74%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (73%); COASTAL AREAS (73%); IRRIGATION (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); ANIMALS (66%); OCEANS (64%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (60%)

Organization: INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (58%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (79%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (78%); DEFORESTATION (74%); PUBLISHING (74%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (73%); IRRIGATION (73%)

Person: KATHARINE HAYHOE (79%)

Load-Date: November 19, 2013


End of Document


HELPING NATURE HELP ITSELF TO STEM CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 15, 2009 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: OUTDOORS; Pg. DD-1
Length: 334 words
Byline: John Hayes, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


The point, said scientists at a recent presentation, isn't whether humans are primarily responsible for climate change or even how to avoid or minimize an increase in global temperatures.
At a recent meeting at Philadelphia's Drexel University, scientists affiliated with the Nature Conservancy said that while reducing global carbon emissions is important, the national debate is often focused on the wrong themes. It's time, they said, to focus on strategies to help nature adapt to impending climate change.
Scientists from the Nature Conservancy, one of the world's leading conservation groups, said climate change is the biggest threat to the Conservancy's accomplishments of the past 50 years. Because change is inevitable, they said, we need to spend more time talking about ways to prepare for climate change -- not just trying to avoid it. The group urged conservation groups and governments to change the ways they view conservation principles and begin looking at ways of protecting aspects of nature most likely to adapt to climate change.
"The climate change discussion has been primarily focused on the level of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere," said Nels Johnson, Pennsylvania director of conservation science for the Nature Conservancy, in a recent press release. "This must continue, but we also need to think about the fact that some amount of climate change is already inevitable and irreversible, even if we are successful at dramatically reducing emissions. How can plants, animals, people and communities adapt to the changes we know are coming?"
Pennsylvania forests are vulnerable to temperature shifts, he said, and the Susquehanna River, one of the most flood-prone rivers in eastern United States, is capable of causing erosion that could impact the state's agriculture and timber industries. The best environmental policy, said the scientists, is to help nature help itself by protecting parts of local ecosystems most likely to mitigate the impacts of impending climate change.

Notes

GET OUT: Recreation, Fitness And The Great Outdoors / John Hayes can be reached at 412-263-1991 and jhayes@post-gazette.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONSERVATION (90%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (90%); EMISSIONS (78%); FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); GREENHOUSE GASES (78%); LIFE FORMS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (75%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); EROSION (70%); RIVERS (68%); FLOOD ZONES (63%)

Organization: NATURE CONSERVANCY (84%); DREXEL UNIVERSITY (58%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); PUBLISHING (74%); AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (69%); FORESTRY & LOGGING (64%); FLOOD ZONES (63%)

Geographic: PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (73%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%)

Load-Date: February 18, 2009


End of Document


WHY FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE?; BUSINESS PROFESSOR MAKES THE CASE ON ECONOMIC, PRACTICAL AND MORAL GROUNDS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 13, 2009 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 607 words
Byline: TERRENCE R. GUAY
Body


Representatives from 192 countries are meeting in Copenhagen to discuss climate change. What they accomplish -- or not -- will have profound effects on global economic, political and security relations.
Although vocal skeptics claim otherwise, the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the vast majority of scientists have reached two conclusions: that the world's climate is warming, and that human behavior is a major contributor to this change.
There is debate on the pace of change in future years, but it is clear that even small rises in temperature and sea levels will affect every country in the world. Effects include people migrating in search of water and arable land, the extinction of plants and animals, the flooding of coastal areas and declines in health.
The countries of the world need to make binding commitments to address this problem for economic, practical and ethical reasons.
Many in the business community realize that an agreement to reduce carbon emissions is in their economic self-interest. Business hates uncertainty and failure to reach an agreement means further uncertainty.
Companies are not going to invest in new technologies before they know what incentives and rewards apply. Similarly, they will be reluctant to change their ways of doing business until they know what penalties will apply.
Individually and collectively through 3C (Combat Climate Change) and other initiatives, leading companies from around the world, including Citigroup, General Electric, Hewlett Packard, Lufthansa and Unilever, as well as China's CNOOC oil company and Russia's Gazprom, are lobbying governments to make commitments that reduce these uncertainties by establishing a clear legal and regulatory framework.
Committing resources to address climate change serves practical purposes, too. Although "green jobs" may be a significant side effect, committing to reducing global warming almost certainly will carry a price tag for companies and households. But as a society, we make this kind of trade-off every day.
Few of us would think repealing child labor laws to be progress, and most of us prefer to have a Food and Drug Administration around to evaluate the safety of pharmaceutical products. Our economy would grow more quickly without these and numerous other regulations, but for a variety of reasons we accept lower economic growth to achieve other societal objectives. So it should be with paying for climate change.
Few of us would prefer a return to Dickensian-era capitalism. Some things are simply worth paying for because they are worth doing.
Finally, committing to dealing with climate change is the ethical thing to do. Personal responsibility is a principle advocated by the political left and right. That is, individuals are accountable for their actions, receiving credit when successful and accepting blame for mistakes. We expect steroid-using athletes to take responsibility for their actions, and we demand bankers be held accountable for the role their industry played in the economic crisis.
Most of the responsibility for a changing climate falls on the shoulders of the United States, Europe and the rest of the developed world. Our increased wealth over the past two centuries is in large part a result of economic development that did not always take the best care of the environment.
True, China, India and other rising economic powers comprise an ever-larger slice of the climate-change pie. But those countries with the greatest cumulative impact on the climate, including the United States, should take more substantive steps to clean up the mess they made. It is the fair thing to do.

Notes

Terrence R. Guay is clinical associate professor of international business at Penn State's Smeal College of Business (trguay@psu.edu)./
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ETHICS (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); AGREEMENTS (88%); SECURITIES BROKERS (88%); LOBBYING (79%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); GREENHOUSE GASES (78%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (77%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (77%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (77%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (77%); LIFE FORMS (76%); UNITED NATIONS (73%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (72%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (72%); FOOD SAFETY REGULATION (71%); ILLICIT STEROID USE (71%); COASTAL AREAS (70%); CHILD LABOR (68%); PRODUCT SAFETY (67%); DRUG SAFETY (62%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (62%); CHILD LABOR LAWS (61%); DRUGS IN SPORTS (50%)

Company:  OAO GAZPROM (66%);  CITIGROUP INC (55%);  CHINA NATIONAL OFFSHORE OIL CORP (54%);  DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AG (54%);  GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (54%);  UNILEVER PLC/NV (54%);  HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (54%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (58%)

Ticker: OGZD (LSE) (66%); GAZP (RTS) (66%); C (NYSE) (55%); C (BMV) (55%); 8710 (TSE) (55%); LHA (FRA) (54%); GNE (PAR) (54%); GEC (LSE) (54%); GE (SWX) (54%); GE (NYSE) (54%); UNIA (AMS) (54%); UNA (BIT) (54%); UNA (AMS) (54%); UN (NYSE) (54%); ULVR (LSE) (54%); UL (NYSE) (54%); HPQ (NYSE) (54%)

Industry: NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (66%); NAICS486210 PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS (66%); NAICS221210 NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (66%); NAICS213112 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR OIL & GAS OPERATIONS (66%); SIC4923 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (66%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (66%); NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (55%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD ISSUING (55%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (55%); NAICS211112 NATURAL GAS LIQUID EXTRACTION (54%); NAICS481112 SCHEDULED FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (54%); NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (54%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (54%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS335222 HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATOR & HOME FREEZER MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS335210 SMALL ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS325620 TOILET PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS325611 SOAP & OTHER DETERGENT MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311412 FROZEN SPECIALTY FOOD MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311411 FROZEN FRUIT, JUICE & VEGETABLE MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311225 FATS & OILS REFINING & BLENDING (54%); NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (54%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (99%); BANKING & FINANCE (91%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (91%); SOAPS & DETERGENTS MFG (91%); AIRLINES (90%); FOOD & BEVERAGE (90%); FOOD INDUSTRY (90%); FROZEN FOODS (90%); FROZEN FOODS MFG (90%); FRUITS & VEGETABLES (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE MFG (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES (90%); MAJOR APPLIANCE MFG (90%); MANUFACTURING (90%); NATURAL GAS (90%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (90%); NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (90%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (90%); NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS (90%); NATURAL GAS PIPELINES (90%); NATURAL GAS PROCESSING (90%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); SOAPS & DETERGENTS (90%); TOILETRIES MFG (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); SECURITIES BROKERS (88%); EMISSIONS (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (77%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (77%); CREDIT CARDS (74%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (74%); PUBLISHING (74%); FOOD MFG (73%); COMPUTER PERIPHERALS (71%); FOOD SAFETY REGULATION (71%); STEROIDS (71%); PRODUCT SAFETY (67%); DRUG SAFETY (62%)

Geographic: EARTH (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (58%)

Load-Date: December 15, 2009


End of Document


WHY FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE? IN SERVICE TO OUR COUNTRY BUSINESS PROFESSOR TERRENCE R. GUAY MAKES THE CASE ON ECONOMIC, PRACTICAL AND MORAL GROUNDS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 13, 2009 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 607 words
Body


Representatives from 192 countries are meeting in Copenhagen to discuss climate change. What they accomplish -- or not -- will have profound effects on global economic, political and security relations.
Although vocal skeptics claim otherwise, the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the vast majority of scientists have reached two conclusions: that the world's climate is warming, and that human behavior is a major contributor to this change.
There is debate on the pace of change in future years, but it is clear that even small rises in temperature and sea levels will affect every country in the world. Effects include people migrating in search of water and arable land, the extinction of plants and animals, the flooding of coastal areas and declines in health.
The countries of the world need to make binding commitments to address this problem for economic, practical and ethical reasons.
Many in the business community realize that an agreement to reduce carbon emissions is in their economic self-interest. Business hates uncertainty and failure to reach an agreement means further uncertainty.
Companies are not going to invest in new technologies before they know what incentives and rewards apply. Similarly, they will be reluctant to change their ways of doing business until they know what penalties will apply.
Individually and collectively through 3C (Combat Climate Change) and other initiatives, leading companies from around the world, including Citigroup, General Electric, Hewlett Packard, Lufthansa and Unilever, as well as China's CNOOC oil company and Russia's Gazprom, are lobbying governments to make commitments that reduce these uncertainties by establishing a clear legal and regulatory framework.
Committing resources to address climate change serves practical purposes, too. Although "green jobs" may be a significant side effect, committing to reducing global warming almost certainly will carry a price tag for companies and households. But as a society, we make this kind of trade-off every day.
Few of us would think repealing child labor laws to be progress, and most of us prefer to have a Food and Drug Administration around to evaluate the safety of pharmaceutical products. Our economy would grow more quickly without these and numerous other regulations, but for a variety of reasons we accept lower economic growth to achieve other societal objectives. So it should be with paying for climate change.
Few of us would prefer a return to Dickensian-era capitalism. Some things are simply worth paying for because they are worth doing.
Finally, committing to dealing with climate change is the ethical thing to do. Personal responsibility is a principle advocated by the political left and right. That is, individuals are accountable for their actions, receiving credit when successful and accepting blame for mistakes. We expect steroid-using athletes to take responsibility for their actions, and we demand bankers be held accountable for the role their industry played in the economic crisis.
Most of the responsibility for a changing climate falls on the shoulders of the United States, Europe and the rest of the developed world. Our increased wealth over the past two centuries is in large part a result of economic development that did not always take the best care of the environment.
True, China, India and other rising economic powers comprise an ever-larger slice of the climate-change pie. But those countries with the greatest cumulative impact on the climate, including the United States, should take more substantive steps to clean up the mess they made. It is the fair thing to do.

Notes

Terrence R. Guay is clinical associate professor of international business at Penn State's Smeal College of Business (trguay@psu.edu)./
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); AGREEMENTS (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ETHICS (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); SECURITIES BROKERS (88%); LOBBYING (79%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); GREENHOUSE GASES (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (77%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (77%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (76%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (76%); LIFE FORMS (75%); UNITED NATIONS (73%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (72%); FOOD SAFETY REGULATION (71%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (71%); COASTAL AREAS (70%); ILLICIT STEROID USE (70%); CHILD LABOR (67%); PRODUCT SAFETY (66%); DRUG SAFETY (62%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (62%); CHILD LABOR LAWS (61%); DRUGS IN SPORTS (50%)

Company:  OAO GAZPROM (66%);  CITIGROUP INC (55%);  CHINA NATIONAL OFFSHORE OIL CORP (54%);  DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AG (54%);  GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (54%);  UNILEVER PLC/NV (54%);  HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (54%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (58%)

Ticker: OGZD (LSE) (66%); GAZP (RTS) (66%); C (NYSE) (55%); C (BMV) (55%); 8710 (TSE) (55%); LHA (FRA) (54%); GNE (PAR) (54%); GEC (LSE) (54%); GE (SWX) (54%); GE (NYSE) (54%); UNIA (AMS) (54%); UNA (BIT) (54%); UNA (AMS) (54%); UN (NYSE) (54%); ULVR (LSE) (54%); UL (NYSE) (54%); HPQ (NYSE) (54%)

Industry: NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (66%); NAICS486210 PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS (66%); NAICS221210 NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (66%); NAICS213112 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR OIL & GAS OPERATIONS (66%); SIC4923 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (66%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (66%); NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (55%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD ISSUING (55%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (55%); NAICS211112 NATURAL GAS LIQUID EXTRACTION (54%); NAICS481112 SCHEDULED FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (54%); NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (54%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (54%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS335222 HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATOR & HOME FREEZER MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS335210 SMALL ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS325620 TOILET PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS325611 SOAP & OTHER DETERGENT MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311412 FROZEN SPECIALTY FOOD MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311411 FROZEN FRUIT, JUICE & VEGETABLE MANUFACTURING (54%); NAICS311225 FATS & OILS REFINING & BLENDING (54%); NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (54%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (99%); BANKING & FINANCE (91%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (91%); SOAPS & DETERGENTS MFG (91%); AIRLINES (90%); FOOD & BEVERAGE (90%); FOOD INDUSTRY (90%); FROZEN FOODS (90%); FROZEN FOODS MFG (90%); FRUITS & VEGETABLES (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE MFG (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES (90%); MAJOR APPLIANCE MFG (90%); MANUFACTURING (90%); NATURAL GAS (90%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (90%); NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (90%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (90%); NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS (90%); NATURAL GAS PIPELINES (90%); NATURAL GAS PROCESSING (90%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); SOAPS & DETERGENTS (90%); TOILETRIES MFG (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); SECURITIES BROKERS (88%); EMISSIONS (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (76%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (76%); PUBLISHING (74%); CREDIT CARDS (73%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (73%); FOOD MFG (72%); FOOD SAFETY REGULATION (71%); COMPUTER PERIPHERALS (70%); STEROIDS (70%); PRODUCT SAFETY (66%); DRUG SAFETY (62%)

Geographic: EARTH (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (57%)

Load-Date: December 13, 2009


End of Document


TEACH-IN TO FOCUS ON GLOBAL WARMING; THREE-DAY EVENT AT CMU, ELSEWHERE TO DISCUSS SOLUTIONS FOR CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 28, 2008 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 648 words
Byline: Don Hopey, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Like some global game of connect the dots, climate change solutions likely will come from the merging of local programs and policies rather than an international treaty.
That's what environmental policy expert M. Granger Morgan, head of Carnegie Mellon University's department of engineering and public policy, will tell those attending Focus the Nation's local kickoff event at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday at Doherty Hall on Carnegie Mellon's campus in Oakland.
Billed by its organizers as the "largest teach-in in U.S. history," the three-day program at more than 1,400 schools and universities -- including 52 in Pennsylvania -- will highlight discussions of solutions for climate change, arguably among the most important issues of this century.
"It's nice that finally more of the population is paying attention to climate change," Dr. Morgan said, "but there will be a high price to pay if we wait another decade or two before we get serious about addressing it."
Other local events in the effort to raise awareness about climate change are scheduled at the University of Pittsburgh, La Roche College, Chatham University, Duquesne University and several high schools.
"There are various technologies and strategies for decarbonizing our electric system, and the cost is entirely affordable if we do it in an orderly and planned way now," said Dr. Morgan, who has said that U.S. electric power plants must cut emissions by more than 80 percent during the next 50 years to slow the impact of global warming.
"We can't wait for everyone to agree on a treaty. The most effective way to a solution is to encourage action. As different parts of the world get serious and, over time, merge, eventually they will coalesce into a global agreement."
After Dr. Morgan's speech, the "2% Solution," a nationwide Webcast featuring actor and clean energy advocate Edward Norton, Stanford University climate scientist Steve Schneider, and Hunter Lovins, chief executive officer of Natural Capitalism, will be shown.
On Thursday, beginning at 9 a.m. in Carnegie Mellon's University Center, faculty members and community sustainability leaders will make presentations on topics, including "All Your Climate Science Questions Answered," practical tips for a low-carbon lifestyle, the latest developments in solar technology and what a changing climate will mean for Pennsylvania.
"Green Democracy," a political forum sponsored by all of the Pittsburgh area schools, will be held at 2 p.m. Friday, at the University of Pittsburgh's David Lawrence Hall, Room 120. Invited speakers include U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle, D-Forest Hills, and city Councilman Bill Peduto.
The Pennsylvania Environmental Council will present its Climate Change Roadmap for Pennsylvania at seven events throughout the state, five of them on Thursday at Carnegie Mellon, Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Pitt's Johnstown Campus, Allegheny College and Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania.
It sets a goal of reducing Pennsylvania's greenhouse gas emissions, which are blamed for causing climate change, by 25 percent by 2025.
"Pennsylvania alone generates about 1 percent of the world's greenhouse gases, putting us in the same group with the top 25 emitting nations in the world," said Brian Hill, Pennsylvania Environmental Council president. "We're a big part of the problem. We need to be a big part of the solution."
All of the presentations are open to the public.
The final part of the teach-in will be the "Choose Your Future" vote, in which students, faculty and community participants select their top five solutions from a list of 10 available on the organization's Web site, www.focusthenation.org.
For more information on Focus the Nation events at Pittsburgh-area schools, visit www.ftnpittsburgh.org or call Vanessa Schweizer at 1-845-270-9330. For more information about the PEC Climate Change Roadmap for Pennsylvania, visit            www.pecpa.org.

Notes

Don Hopey can be reached at dhopey@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1983.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); SUSTAINABILITY (78%); TRENDS & EVENTS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); ENGINEERING (77%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (77%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (77%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); HISTORY (70%); HIGH SCHOOLS (69%); DEMOCRACIES (65%); EXECUTIVES (60%)

Organization: DUQUESNE UNIVERSITY (55%); UNIVERSITY OF PITTSBURGH (55%)

Industry: EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); ENGINEERING (77%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (77%); WEBCASTS (76%); PUBLISHING (74%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (70%); SOLAR ENERGY (70%); HIGH SCHOOLS (69%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (65%)

Person: MICHAEL F DOYLE (79%)

Geographic: PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (93%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (95%)

Load-Date: January 28, 2008


End of Document


LETTER TO THE HARD-BOILED; SCIENTISTS TELL CONGRESS THAT CLIMATE CHANGE IS REAL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 5, 2011 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-14
Length: 467 words
Body


If you're stuck in your house because of snow and cold, just check the news to see that you are not alone. Much of the country has been besieged by unusually severe storms -- and the weather woes aren't just here. Northern Australia, the scene of massive flooding, is now recovering from a powerful cyclone.
In the United States, this is the time when some uncomprehending wit will remark that he's going out into the driveway to shovel the big pile of global warming. That person has half a point -- no one can say that this or that storm is the result of global warming.
But global warming isn't about having little or no snow -- it's about weather convulsions as the planet as a whole warms up.
That the weather worldwide is screwed up can be seen from the evidence before our eyes. That the planet is heating up can be found in scientific data. The World Meteorological Organization, part of the United Nations, said 2010 tied 2005 and 1998 as the hottest year on record. Global temperatures in 2001 to 2010 were the highest recorded in a 10-year period. It was a year, the WMO noted, with a "high number of extreme weather events ..."
It is against this ominous backdrop that 18 distinguished academics across the country have written a letter to those who should be paying attention -- members of the U.S. Congress.
Coordinated by the Project on Climate Science, the letter reminds the lawmakers that all the evidence suggests climate change is real and poses not just an environmental threat but challenges to the U.S. economy, national security and public health.
"The debate about climate change has become increasingly ideological and partisan," they said. "But climate change is not the product of a belief system or ideology. Instead, it is based on scientific fact, and no amount of argument, coercion or debate among talking heads in the media can alter the physics of climate change." As their letter pointedly notes, "There are no Democratic or Republican carbon dioxide molecules; they are all invisible and they all trap heat."
The letter also takes direct aim at the legion of climate change deniers: "Climate change deniers cloak themselves in scientific language, selectively critiquing aspects of mainstream climate science. Sometimes they present alternative hypotheses as an explanation of a particular point, as if the body of evidence were a house of cards standing or falling on one detail; but the edifice of climate science instead rests on a concrete foundation."
Unfortunately, deniers are now significantly represented in the halls of the new Congress, so this letter may be an act of futility until a time when the weather becomes so odd that no one can deny a link. Even lobsters in a boiling pot must eventually realize that something is not right, but by then it is too late.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); GLOBAL WARMING (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); SEVERE WEATHER (90%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (90%); WEATHER (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); METEOROLOGY (78%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); FLOODS & FLOODING (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); NATURAL DISASTERS (77%); US CONGRESS (77%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (72%); UNITED NATIONS (72%); PUBLIC HEALTH (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (63%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (50%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (73%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (92%); PUBLISHING (74%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%); AUSTRALIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 8, 2011


End of Document


DEMOCRATS UNVEIL GREEN NEW DEAL; LEGISLATORS AIM TO CREATE JOBS, TAKE ON THREAT OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
February 8, 2019 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A-6
Length: 667 words
Byline: Devan Cole and Sunlen Serfaty CNN
Body


Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., and Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., unveiled their Green New Deal resolution Thursday, outlining the massive piece of legislation they hope will tackle a litany of issues related to the United States' role in global climate change.
"Climate change and our environmental challenges are one of the biggest existential threats to our way of life. Not just as a nation, but as a world," Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said at a news conference outside of the Capitol Building.
"What this resolution is doing is saying this is our first step. Our first step is to define the problem and define the scope of the solution," she added. "And so we're here to say that small, incremental policy solutions are not enough. They can be part of a solution, but they are not the solution unto itself."
Mr. Markey predicted more Democrats would sign on and said some Republicans may back the plan.
"This is now a voting issue across the country," he said. "The green generation has risen up and they are saying they want this issue solved" as one of the top two or three issues in the 2020 election, Mr. Markey said.
The sweeping resolution includes a 10-year commitment to convert "100 percent of the country's power demands" to "clean, renewable and zero-emission energy sources"; to upgrade "all existing buildings" to meet energy efficiency requirements; and to expand high-speed rail so broadly that most air travel would be rendered obsolete.
The initiative, introduced as nonbinding resolutions in the House and Senate, is tethered to an infrastructure program that its authors say could create millions of new "green jobs," while guaranteeing health care, "a family-sustaining wage, adequate family and medical leave, paid vacations and retirement security" to every American.
Modeled on President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal in the 1930s, the resolution will not move in its current form, but some ideas could advance as part of more modest legislation to address the climate crisis.
The legislation has become a key policy initiative for Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, the progressive New Yorker who, shortly after being elected in November, joined the Sunrise Movement to protest over the climate change issue in the office of then-House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi. She later paired up with Mr. Markey to begin working on the legislation.
In an interview with NPR earlier Thursday, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said that although their proposed solutions are bold, they're "nowhere near the scale of the actual problem that climate change presents to us, to our country, to the world."
The resolution says that the deal will "promote justice and equity" to a dozen communities, including indigenous peoples, migrant communities and low-income workers.
"So really the heart of the Green New Deal is about social justice and it's about allowing and fighting for things like fully-funded pensions for coal miners in West Virginia, fighting for clean water in Flint, and fighting for the ability of indigenous peoples to take a leadership role in where we're moving as a country," Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said.
Speaking at a news conference Thursday, Ms. Pelosi said that while she hasn't yet seen the details of the proposal, "I do know that it's enthusiastic, and we welcome all the enthusiasm that's out there."
Republicans seized on the proposal with relish, portraying the entire resolution as absurd. Bob Salera, spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, called the idea "zany." The Republican National Committee derided it as "a socialist wish list."
For all of its audacity, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez and Mr. Markey also steered clear of several thorny issues.
The resolution does not specify a date for eliminating planet-warming emissions, instead calling for the elimination of fossil fuels from major economic sectors "as much as technologically feasible."
It also avoids denouncing specific types of clean energy alternatives, specifically nuclear.
The New York Times and The Associated Press contributed.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alex Wong/Getty Images: Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., speaks as Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., center right, listens during a news conference in front of the Capitol in Washington on Feb. 7, 2019.
PHOTO: Alex Wong/Getty Images: U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., speaks as Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., listens during a news conference to unveil the Green New Deal on Thursday in front of the U.S. Capitol.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (89%); JOB CREATION (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (79%); PUBLIC POLICY (79%); GREAT DEPRESSION (78%); FAMILY (77%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (76%); WRITERS (73%); EMISSIONS (72%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (72%); ENERGY DEMAND (70%); ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (69%); RETIREMENT & RETIREES (63%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES (62%); HOLIDAY & VACATION PAY (61%); PRESS CONFERENCES (56%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (50%)

Industry: ENERGY & UTILITIES (77%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (76%); PUBLISHING (73%); WRITERS (73%); EMISSIONS (72%); ENERGY DEMAND (70%); ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (69%); HIGH SPEED TRAINS (50%)

Person: ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (93%); EDWARD J MARKEY (79%); NANCY PELOSI (59%)

Geographic: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: February 8, 2019


End of Document


TO DENY CLIMATE CHANGE IS TO DENY HELP
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
September 9, 2017 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2017 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A-6
Length: 234 words
Byline: PRACHI PATEL, Point Breeze
Body


On the heels of Harvey's devastation in Texas and Louisiana, we are seeing the wrath of another historic storm hitting the Caribbean and approaching Florida. It is still too early to know how many lives and dollars will be lost to Irma.
Back in my birth country of India, summers have gotten steadily hotter in the past half-century, bringing scorching heat waves. There were more than 2,500 heat-wave deaths in 2015 and close to 2,000 last year.
More extreme storms, heat, drought and floods: This is the new normal we face because of a changing climate.
We consult medical professionals when we are sick. Shouldn't we listen to the experts - climate scientists in this case - when they say that climate change is making heat waves and storms like Harvey stronger, longer and more intense? Not causing them, but making them fiercer.
The Trump White House has appointed science skeptics to run critical agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency and NASA and wants to cut funding for NOAA. Meanwhile, sane thinkers in the Pentagon acknowledge the threats of climate change to the U.S. and the world. They understand it is going to upend lives, affect food and water resources, wreck infrastructure, burden economies and ultimately cause political instability.
For the health and safety of the American people (and the world), our elected leaders need to acknowledge climate change and tackle it head-on.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (90%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (90%); HEAT WAVES (90%); SEVERE WEATHER (90%); DROUGHT (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (74%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); NEGATIVE POLITICAL NEWS (73%); HEAT STRESS DISORDERS (71%); APPOINTMENTS (70%); WATER RESOURCES (70%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%); CONSERVATION (67%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (67%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (55%); WATER QUALITY (51%)

Industry: PUBLISHING (74%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%)

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); LOUISIANA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); INDIA (77%)

Load-Date: September 12, 2017


End of Document


Page 9 of 10CLIMATE CHANGE: READING THE LEAVES; NORTHEAST FORESTS FACING SLOW ALTERATION OF SPECIES


 


 



Page 8 of 14ENVISIONING THE POSSIBLE FUTURE OF CLIMATE CHANGE; RECENT HISTORY MAKES PITTSBURGH A GRITTY EXAMPLE OF THE CHANGES REQUIRED TO COMBAT GLOBAL WARMING


 


 



Page 14 of 15CLIMATE CHANGE AND SANDY: A COMPLEX CONNECTION


 


 



Page 17 of 18CLIMATE CHANGE INFORMATION SCARCE IN SOME AREA SCIENCE INSTITUTIONS


 


 



Page 21 of 22CLIMATE CHANGE PANELISTS URGE SWIFT ACTION


 


 



Page 24 of 25CLIMATE CHANGE PANELISTS URGE SWIFT ACTION


 


 



Page 27 of 28GLOBAL WARMING ISSUE HARD TO QUELL EARTH DAY


 


 



Page 31 of 32NOMINEE'S CLIMATE VIEWS RAISING CONCERNS AT SENATE, U.N.; CRAFT: 'BOTH SIDES' OF SCIENCE WORTHY


 


 



Page 35 of 36STUDY WARNS OF DRASTIC Pa. CLIMATE CHANGE \; HOTTER SUMMERS AND WINTERS, FLOODS ALL PART OF THE MIX


 


 



Page 38 of 39THE PHENOMENON THAT DARE NOT SPEAK ITS NAME; WHEN DID 'CLIMATE CHANGE' AND 'GLOBAL WARMING' BECOME 'CLEAN ENERGY'?


 


 



Page 41 of 42U.N. CHIEF: 'RAPID' CUTS NEEDED TO CURB CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 43 of 44CLIMATE CHANGE THREATENS NATIONAL SECURITY; THIS ISSUE IS ABOUT SCIENCE, NOT POLITICS, AND THE MILITARY IS TAKING IT VERY SERIOUSLY


 


 



Page 46 of 47THIS IS WHY EVEN SCIENTISTS UNDERESTIMATE CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 49 of 50PA. MUST ACT NOW ON CLIMATE CHANGE, SENATE PANEL TOLD


 


 



Page 52 of 53PA. MUST ACT NOW ON CLIMATE CHANGE, SENATE PANEL TOLD


 


 



Page 55 of 56CLIMATE CHANGE THROUGH HISTORY; IT HAS PRODUCED WARMING AND COOLING, PROSPERITY AND CITIES, WAR AND FAMINE


 


 



Page 58 of 59WHY DO DEMOCRATS SHOW SUCH DISDAIN FOR NUCLEAR POWER?; UNTIL THEY EMBRACE NUCLEAR ENERGY AS ONE WAY TO DECARBONIZE THE PLANET, THEY CAN'T BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY ON ....


 


 



Page 61 of 62CLIMATE CHANGE TO BOOST HEALTH PROBLEMS; CONFERENCE HINTS AT IMPACT ON PA.


 


 



Page 64 of 65WE MUST MONITOR CLIMATE CHANGE;VESTED INTERESTS WANT TO DISMISS INFORMED INQUIRY. BUT WE CANNOT WAIT


 


 



Page 66 of 67PITTSBURGH AND PARIS; WHAT I LEARNED AT THE CLIMATE-CHANGE SUMMIT IN FRANCE


 


 



Page 69 of 70GORE SHARES PEACE PRIZE; PRAISED FOR SPREADING WORD ON MAN-MADE CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 72 of 73THE EROSION OF EASTER ISLAND; THE FAMOUS MOAI ARE THREATENED BY CLIMATE CHANGE, WRITES BILL ZLATOS


 


 



Page 76 of 77REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE DEPICTS A PLANET IN PERIL


 


 



Page 79 of 80HELPING NATURE HELP ITSELF TO STEM CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 81 of 82WHY FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE?; BUSINESS PROFESSOR MAKES THE CASE ON ECONOMIC, PRACTICAL AND MORAL GROUNDS


 


 



Page 84 of 85WHY FIGHT CLIMATE CHANGE? IN SERVICE TO OUR COUNTRY BUSINESS PROFESSOR TERRENCE R. GUAY MAKES THE CASE ON ECONOMIC, PRACTICAL AND MORAL GROUNDS


 


 



Page 87 of 88TEACH-IN TO FOCUS ON GLOBAL WARMING; THREE-DAY EVENT AT CMU, ELSEWHERE TO DISCUSS SOLUTIONS FOR CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 90 of 91LETTER TO THE HARD-BOILED; SCIENTISTS TELL CONGRESS THAT CLIMATE CHANGE IS REAL


 


 



Page 92 of 93DEMOCRATS UNVEIL GREEN NEW DEAL; LEGISLATORS AIM TO CREATE JOBS, TAKE ON THREAT OF CLIMATE CHANGE


 


 



Page 95 of 95TO DENY CLIMATE CHANGE IS TO DENY HELP


 


 

