
Could it happen; Abrupt climate change shaped Earth's past, threatens its future
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
May 29, 2004 Saturday
All Editions


Copyright 2004 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A1
Length: 2250 words
Byline: MISTY EDGECOMB OF THE NEWS STAFF
Body


Someday, floodwaters could slowly advance on Manhattan, echoing the deluged avenues depicted in "The Day After Tomorrow," the new climate-change disaster movie opening this weekend.
Someday, abrupt climate shifts could turn Maine into tundra, or spur worldwide droughts, crop shortages and wars, as predicted in the Pentagon's worst-case scenario report released earlier this year.
Any number of doomsday scenarios have a slight probability of coming true someday - after all, the only constant about the Earth's climate is its perpetual change.
But the immediate drama is that dozens of scientists worldwide, including a staff of 28 researchers at the University of Maine's Climate Change Institute, are working against time to understand the complex story of the Earth's climate history so our civilization can survive inevitable future climate changes that will transform our world.
"We're talking about the oceans, the atmosphere - everything," said professor Paul Mayewski, who is based at the university. "You can't escape climate."
Climate change
Few people notice the climate around them unless nature pulls out all the stops with a sudden ice storm or a lingering drought. And even fewer people understand how climate operates.
Just as an orchestra needs dozens of different instruments, each playing its role, to perform all the dips and swells of a symphony, climate is far more complicated than it first appears.
Climate study is the gumbo of science, incorporating biology, chemistry, physics,
geology and even social sciences such as anthropology and archaeology to understand patterns in precipitation and temperature over hundreds, thousands and millions of years.
Most scientists today agree that global warming caused by human activities, such as logging and burning fossil fuels, play a role in the Earth's changing climate - as do dramatic natural events such as volcanoes and meteors, and ongoing natural cycles such as ocean currents and fluctuating solar flares. Hundreds of factors, some of which scientists are just beginning to understand, influence the melody of climate.
But as the oboe line alone gives only a hint of what a piece of music should sound like, any one factor considered independently cannot accurately predict changes in the Earth's climate.
Often, different trends balance each other out to keep the climate stable. But sometimes climate factors combine to build on one another and plunge the world into abrupt, drastic warming or cooling trends that can occur in as few as two years and last for centuries.
"They're big, and we don't know exactly why they happen," said professor George Denton, also of the Climate Change Institute.
Abrupt climate change
For decades, most scientists believed the Earth's climate remained stable for millennia - until the glaciers of Greenland rewrote hundreds of thousands of years of climate history.
As early as the 1930s, a few researchers had supported the alternative theory of abrupt climate change, and bits of evidence here and there seemed to support the theory, but the idea never took hold of the public imagination.
Then Mayewski and several other leading researchers went to Greenland. It took three winters just to find the right place to drill a pair of 2-mile-deep holes, and five years to remove the ice samples. But the effort to locate "perfect ice" that had not been marred by melting finally paid off in 1989.
The ice cylinders had preserved hundreds of thousands of years of history, with the differences in each winter's snowfall as clearly visible as the rings of a tree trunk. Developing a scale by calibrating the most recent 100 years of the ice cores to modern temperature records, the scientists were able to plot the temperatures of the past 1,000 centuries.
What they found was shocking. At least once every 10,000 years, average temperatures dramatically shifted, by as much as 25 to 30 degrees Fahrenheit over just a few years.
"Abrupt climate change events start in less than 10 years - sometimes in less than two - last for 100 years or so, then go away just that fast," Mayewski said.
In comparison, climate changes of only a degree or two over centuries are known to transform the types of plant and animal life found in an area, Jacobson said.
Initially, some scientists believed the effects were confined to Greenland and other places where ice cores were taken.
But when the ice cores from Mayewski's expedition were cut apart, melted down and analyzed in the lab, the samples from periods of abrupt change showed other signs of environmental turbulence, such as dust and sea salt in the ice indicating high winds and storm activity, and dramatic decreases in the chemical evidence of plant life during cold periods - evidence that abrupt climate change affected far larger areas.
And as soon as the Greenland ice data was published, other researchers reviewed their data from ice cores, sediment samples, tree rings and fossils to build a strong case that a number of abrupt climate change events in the past had occurred simultaneously all over the world.
Patterns of climate shifts, some gradual, some abrupt, began to emerge, and the data showed that cyclic shifts have occurred throughout history on scales of tens, hundreds and thousands of years.
Some scientists continue to dispute all theories of abrupt climate change to this day; but for most climate researchers, the pieces all came together in the early 1990s. Scientists by then had evidence that abrupt climate shifts occurred, and that many of the changes were global.
"It was remarkable. No sooner did the papers hit journals like Science and Nature than people started picking it up," Mayewski said. "In most cases, it takes decades for people to believe something new."
Other researchers, including professor Wally Broeker, of Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in upstate New York, began researching possible causes of historic climate shifts and developed somewhat more controversial theories of how global warming might wreak havoc on already complex atmospheric systems, to dire consequences.
"Suddenly we realized that the ocean and the atmosphere were interacting in strange ways," Broeker said. "It's all very new and very exciting."
Global warming
Exactly how human-caused global warming will affect the climate system is hotly debated within the scientific community. But the vast majority of the world's researchers agree that it will make climate even less predictable.
"Whenever you further complicate an already complicated system, you're going to have surprises," Mayewski said.
Data from all over the world prove the 1990s were the warmest decade in a century. Permafrost is melting in Alaska. Scientific observations have verified that ice on the Great Lakes, in Maine's rivers and elsewhere is melting earlier each spring, and that some songbirds are shifting their migration patterns. Seed catalogs have already changed the boundaries of the climate zones they use to advise gardeners on which plants to buy.
Some researchers cite historic global climate patterns to lay blame on natural sources rather than fossil fuels, but according to Mayewski, natural cycles would indicate that the world is actually overdue for a downward temperature shift.
"Without the human [caused] warming of the past few decades, we would have been in a slightly colder phase," he said.
"We're putting the climate into a temperature regime that it hasn't visited for 50 million years," Broeker said.
And ironically, many climate models show that continued warming could actually cause some parts of the world, including Europe and the United States to grow colder.
Broeker developed the somewhat controversial theory depicted in "The Day After Tomorrow" - albeit in an exaggerated way - that enough global warming could ultimately freeze temperate regions like Maine into something that looks more like today's northern Canada.
Some climate models based on this theory predict that warmer temperatures could cause glaciers to melt and rainfall to increase, changing the salt balance of the ocean, and ultimately switching off an important Atlantic Ocean current that carries equatorial air north and controls much of the world's weather.
Other researchers believe that tropical weather systems - such as the El Nino events that have been increasing in frequency over recent years - would play a bigger role in prompting abrupt climate change.
New data always bring new questions, and spark new theories, so the elusive goal of precise climate prediction never seems to get any closer, Broeker said.
But throughout the hundreds of diverse theories about how societal global warnings will change the natural climate system, there's a chaotic common thread - adding greenhouse gases to a delicately calibrated natural system could help push the world into a long overdue abrupt climate change.
"It's Russian roulette," Broeker said. "We're playing with a system that we don't understand."
Crystal ball
With the buzz surrounding abrupt climate change research, it was perhaps inevitable that Hollywood would come calling. But policy-makers in Washington were paying as much attention to the new research as storytellers in Los Angeles.
In 2002, the National Academy of Sciences issued a report urging "immediate study" of abrupt climate change. And earlier this year, the Department of Defense declassified its alarming Pentagon report calling abrupt climate change a "national security concern."
Mayewski calls the Pentagon report "a real eye-opener," and said the focus on abrupt climate change research couldn't come at a better time.
For as the Earth warms, the ice cores that provide the best records of global climate history are disappearing.
"It's melting," he said. "It's equivalent to losing the only library on Earth that tells us what was happening in the Greek period."
In 1979, Mayewski conducted his research in Asia at elevations of 15,000 feet. Today, he must climb to 18,000 or 20,000 feet to find the same quality of ice.
"A lot of the sites that we could have sampled 20 years ago are gone," he said.
Today, scientists have enough data to broadly predict what the Earth's climate will look like in 10,000 years. But to make predictions on a fine enough scale for governments to make plans, researchers need to double their efforts at understanding how past changes occurred, Mayewski said.
Information about how climate change affected the Southern Hemisphere is seriously lacking, and retreating glaciers in Asia, Canada, Alaska, New Zealand and South America still contain valuable data, he said.
Last year, with support from both of Maine's senators, a half-million federal dollars were allocated for abrupt climate change research at the university. This year, an additional $1.6 million has been proposed, Denton said.
Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe also recently revived a proposal to fund universities to create a coalition of abrupt climate change research institutions with $60 million in funding over six years.
The funding is crucial, Mayewski said: "It's important to translate the things we do into valuable information as quickly as possible."
For, in the end, it won't be the climate scientists who decide how America will prepare itself for abrupt climate change.
Ultimately, legislators will have to make the critical decisions, with support from informed voters, he said.
"[Abrupt climate change] is something we didn't even dream about until the 1980s," Broeker said. "The public has to start thinking about it."
The terms
Climate: Long-term temperature and precipitation patterns.
Weather: Short-term temperature and precipitation patterns.
Climate change: A gradual shift in temperature and precipitation that continues over many decades, which can move the Earth toward either a warmer or a cooler period.
Global warming: A type of climate change characterized by a gradual warming of the climate that most scientists believe occurs when gases such as methane and carbon dioxide build up in the atmosphere at unusually high levels, often from the burning of fossil fuels, and trap radiation from the sun inside the atmosphere.
Abrupt climate change: A major climate shift that occurs over a period as short as two to 10 years.
Got a computer? You can help
Anyone with a computer can now help to advance scientific understanding about how the Earth's climate might change in the future, by participating in an Internet-based study called the Climate Prediction Project.
The project's founder, Myles Allen, a professor of atmospheric, oceanic and planetary physics at Oxford University in England, has described the project as using idling computers worldwide for "the world's largest climate modeling experiment."
Since the project went public last year, more than 25,000 people have downloaded the climate model, which sets different climate variables and then simulates the passage of time.
With so many computers working simultaneously, the project can accomplish its goals without expensive supercomputers.
The program runs while a home computer is doing other tasks, it doesn't need to be constantly connected to the Internet, and it doesn't require a powerful machine, though the program runs faster with more RAM.
As of June, participants will  have reported to Allen with 22,000 completed models, describing possible climate change predictions. And soon, the scientist hopes to publish an analysis of the results in a  scientific journal.
For more information or to join the project, visit www.climateprediction.net.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (92%); CLIMATOLOGY (91%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (89%); DROUGHT (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); TRENDS (89%); TRENDS & EVENTS (89%); ACTION & ADVENTURE FILMS (78%); GLACIERS & ICEBERGS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); WEATHER (78%); MILLENNIUM (76%); GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS (75%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (73%); MUSIC (70%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (70%); MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (70%); ORCHESTRAS (70%); WIND INSTRUMENTS (70%); ARCHAEOLOGY (69%); OCEANS (68%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (57%)

Industry: ACTION & ADVENTURE FILMS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (73%); MOVIE RELEASE DATES (73%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (70%); MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (70%); ORCHESTRAS (70%); WIND INSTRUMENTS (70%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); EARTH (94%); MAINE, USA (91%)

Load-Date: May 30, 2004


End of Document


Maine can change the debate on climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
January 21, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 Bangor Daily News
Length: 753 words
Body


As the BDN editorial board sets out to take a focused look at four issues this year, our work will depend in part on engagement and input from our readers. After selecting workforce development, referendum reform, the local costs and challenges of rural living as three areas to take a close look at in 2019, we asked the community to help us pick a fourth.
Thankfully, you weren't shy about sharing your opinions. We received roughly 250 responses by email and on social media. And while there was a diverse and interesting mix of topics suggested, one concern was clearly the most popular: climate change.
"Changes in our climate will affect every area of Maine life and its economy, from agriculture to tourism and beyond," one reader said.
"We must contribute to the solution by reducing our greenhouse gas emissions in Maine, and embrace cost-effective adaptation for the impacts we are already experiencing from our marine fisheries to farms to forests to the health of our citizens," another said.
[Farming clams in Maine could help save them from climate change]
But, of course, the impact of climate change it is not the only issue at hand. Readers' suggestions to focus on health care, taxes, tribal relations, prison reform, education, broadband and numerous other issues are no less valid or worthwhile. Many of those issues are inexorably linked with our four stated focus areas, and we will surely address them in that context, and others, in the coming year.
Importantly, our work in 2019 will not be limited strictly to workforce, referendum, rural and climate issues. We will still tackle various topics of the day as they arise or require further review. But the focus areas will guide our overall assessment of work in Augusta -- and across the state -- this year.
Nationally, climate change has taken a back seat. The Trump administration has moved us backward by pledging to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate change agreement and rolling back environmental protection regulations. These moves -- and the debate about them -- have stolen much of the oxygen in our national discourse and debate.
Against this backdrop, the federal government released a report in November that warns of climate change's potentially devastating consequences around the world. It's a warning we should heed.
[Gulf of Maine is having 3rd warmest year on record]
With a new administration here in Maine, already-tangible examples of climate change and its impacts around the state, and members of the research and business communities engaged on the issue, our state has an opportunity to dedicate time and energy to changing policies and practices.
Researchers from the Climate Change Institute at the University of Maine recently released a report analyzing historical climate trends and potential impacts of climate change on coastal Maine, particularly in the context of the agriculture and fishing industries. It's not without irony that the report details how in some cases -- longer growing seasons for crops and a warming Gulf of Maine that has bolstered the lobster industry in the short term, for instance -- our clearly changing climate has actually been beneficial in some ways thus far.
But that evidence, coupled with the expectation of continued warming of both the atmosphere and oceans, spells long-term danger for Maine's economy and underscores the importance of preparedness.
We can acknowledge the complicated and often sobering realities of a changing climate and begin to take action while also realizing that Maine is a relatively small player in the climate equation.
[Susan Collins: Ignoring climate change is 'simply not a solution']
In her inaugural address, Mills proclaimed on climate change, "enough with studies, talk, and debate. It is time to act!"
The appeal to action is understandable, after eight years of climate skepticism from former Gov. Paul LePage. But let's not throw studies, talk and debate out the window as we continue to understand these very real and very concerning climate trends -- particularly as they relate to the economic and environmental impacts that we're already seeing in Maine.
Our focus on climate change in Maine will be guided by an effort to understand its causes, impacts and potential solutions -- and we'll be open to different and divergent views on all of those fronts. But the discussion begins with an understanding that climate change is, in fact, happening. We will not waste time debating its well-documented existence, and neither should policymakers.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); TRENDS (78%); OCEAN ECONOMY (77%); REFERENDUMS (77%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (77%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (73%); EMISSIONS (73%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (73%); GREENHOUSE GASES (73%); EDUCATION REFORM (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (70%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (69%); PRISONS (51%)

Industry: AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (74%); EMISSIONS (73%); AQUACULTURE (52%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); AUGUSTA, ME, USA (79%); MAINE, USA (97%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: January 21, 2019


End of Document


Maine fisheries and blueberries could be at stake due to climate change, report says
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
November 29, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1016 words
Byline: Eesha Pendharkar BDN Staff
Body


Climate change has helped Maine's lobster yield increase fourfold since the 1980s, as warming waters to the south have propelled lobsters north in search of colder waters. But if summer sea temperatures along Maine's coast continue rising and cross a potentially perilous threshold, lobsters' survival in a more temperate Gulf of Maine could be in doubt.
The Gulf of Maine has warmed faster than 99 percent of the world's oceans, and the trend is expected to continue. The warming that has taken place so far, as well as the decline of cod, has proven favorable for Maine's lobster yields in recent years, but if sea temperatures during the summer rise above 68 degrees Fahrenheit, lobster mortality will increase.
That's one conclusion from a new report detailing the potential effects of climate change on Maine's coast. The report, released earlier this month by the Climate Change Institute at the University of Maine, took a close look at how climate change could affect fishing and agriculture. It imagines five climate change scenarios, how they would unfold over the next two decades and the impacts from each one.
The report by Paul Mayewski, the institute's director, and Maine State Climatologist Sean Birkel predicts an overall trend of warmer, wetter weather with rising sea temperatures, shorter winters, longer summers and more frequent storms.
These predictions are in line with the National Climate Assessment that the Trump administration published the day after Thanksgiving and came a week after Mayewski and Birkel's report. The national assessment predicts an increase in extreme weather events due to climate change, and major economic losses and heightened health risks as a result.
A global or national climate change assessment might not be applicable to all states or even regions within a state, however, which is why UMaine's Climate Change Institute has focused on specific regions of Maine, Mayewski said. Mayewski and Birkel used past climate change data collected through Birkel's Climate Reanalyzer tool to make predictions about coastal Maine's climate future, and they plan to do the same for other regions in the state.
"Our goal through reports like this is to give people a better idea of how the climate has changed in the past few decades, and understanding what the plausible scenarios are for future climate and how this might impact, in this case, fisheries and blueberries," Mayewski said.
The five scenarios Mayewski and Birkel lay out in the report describe different degrees of warming that could play out, ranging from little to no change in climate to an abrupt Arctic sea-ice collapse that would signal a rapid increase in global temperature.
Even without extreme changes to global climate, sea levels are still predicted to rise along Maine's coast, and average annual temperatures in the region will most likely increase by 1 degree. One result would be summers that are, on average, a week longer and winters a week shorter.
One scenario Mayewski and Birkel detail predicts no additional global climate change -- as if the climate change underway suddenly stopped. Even in that case, unusual weather patterns including cold stretches, heat waves and heavy rainfall that have already increased in frequency over the past few decades would simply become the new normal.
Four of their five climate change scenarios predict overall temperature increases by 2040, and more extreme weather as a result.
One scenario predicts extreme El Nino warming events, which would mean drought conditions for coastal Maine and reduced sea levels along the coast.
Another scenario predicts abrupt Arctic warming, which would lead to a 3-degree increase in coastal Maine's average temperatures, and would bring about more frequent rainstorms and less snow.
The volcanic eruptions accounted for in one of the researchers' scenarios would bring about the only situation in which temperatures actually cool down for one to three years, resulting in more snow than rain for the coast. However, volcanic events are impossible to predict, according to the report.
In general, a warmer and wetter climate means longer growing periods. Scenarios that include drought or lower temperatures would be detrimental for the state's agriculture industry.
Fishing predictions are complicated by other factors, but an increase in sea surface temperatures will yield more lobsters, as long as the summer temperatures stay below 68 degrees, the report says.
In addition to developing region-specific reports, Mayewski and Birkel are working on a tool that will allow anyone to access climate data and find the most pertinent information.
A farmer, for example, would be able to access past climate data and follow simple instructions to look at predicted temperature and precipitation for the next year or two to determine whether growing conditions are optimal.
"We want to make it a publicly available platform, which we're going to start working on this year so people can answer these questions for themselves," Mayewski said. "Once they begin to realize there is or isn't a link between something they do and climate they become more engaged, they vote that way and they can come to us and talk about learning more."
The Climate Change Institute is one of the first of its kind in North America. It sends researchers and students across the world to study climate change patterns using geological indicators such as ice cores and lake sediments.
"Climate is a global system and by studying purely in Maine you don't necessarily know how Maine climate will change in the future, so we study in the Arctic and other places," Mayewski said. "The fact that we're cold in Maine does not mean that warming isn't happening."
With more regionalized reports, Mayweski said he and institute researchers are hoping to grow awareness about climate change and help people better prepare for its impact.
"Climate change is the biggest security threat we have in the world," he said. "We need to be smart about knowing what's going to happen, plan for it, and, in some situations, we can even use it to our advantage."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CRUSTACEANS (90%); TRENDS (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); WEATHER (79%); FISHES (77%); SEVERE WEATHER (74%); OCEANS (71%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (68%); THANKSGIVING (50%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (79%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (99%); ARCTIC OCEAN (79%); EARTH (79%); ARCTIC (79%)

Load-Date: November 29, 2018


End of Document


Climate change expected to shift Maine's planting seasons. It's just a matter of when. Â 
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
July 28, 2021 Wednesday


Copyright 2021 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1059 words
Body


By Sam Schipani, Bangor Daily News Staff
Farmers and gardeners who feel like Maine's growing season is changing are right. And soon, the state's hardiness zones will reflect that.
It's just a question of when.
"Our average annual temperature has increased by about three [degrees Fahrenheit] over the last century, and is expected to increase an additional two to three [degrees Fahrenheit] over the next 50 years," said Ellen Mallory, extension specialist and professor of sustainable agriculture at the University of Maine.
The winter minimum temperatures are increasing even faster than the average annual temperatures, Mallory said. Those are what's used to determine hardiness zones. Â 
"So I definitely see us heading toward another shift in hardiness zones, although I don't know when that might be," Mallory said.
Farmers and gardeners alike look to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's hardiness zones to figure out what they can and cannot plant in their area -- and when. For growers in the state, this may provide the opportunity for bolder new gardening choices -- but, in the long-term, may be cause for concern.
Hardiness zonesÂ were developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to determine the plants that grow best in each climate band.
In May 2021, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association released its new U.S. Climate Normals, which are released every 10 years and show averages in temperature, rainfall and other conditions for regions across the country.
The last time the hardiness zone map was updated was in 2012, after the last release of the U.S. Climate Normals. The USDA is likely to do the same this time, said Chris Daly, professor at Oregon State University who worked on the development of the 2012 hardiness zone map.
"We're on a parallel path with NOAA to create our climate normal maps," Daly said. "We actually have our own methodology for calculating the normals that's a little different from NOAA, but the fact that everyone is doing them means that this would be the time to update the plant hardiness map."
Even small shifts in temperatures can cause changes in hardiness zones, said Kim Kaplan, public affairs specialist at the USDA.
"The zones are 10-degree ranges," Kaplan said. "A single degree change might affect your zone, but it's only a one degree change in temperature which doesn't make that much difference to plants. Plants don't really see that much difference in one degree. Humans look at it and go, 'Oh dear, I changed a half zone.'"
Still, according to NOAA data from Maine, the average minimum temperature has been steadily rising for the past decade or so in locations throughout the state. Â 
"You can grow stuff in Maine that 50 years ago you couldn't," said Donald Dumont, warning coordination meteorologist at NOAA National Weather Service in Gray. "Everything is getting warmer. Who knows what we'll be able to grow here if the trend continues."
Sean Birkel, research assistant professor and state climatologist at the Climate Change Institute and School of Earth and Climate Sciences at the University of Maine, said that though there is "quite a bit of variability year to year," the statewide growing season on average has increased "by approximately two weeks [total] since 1950."
"We can suspect in the coming decades the overall length of the growing season will continue," Birkel said. "Winters are warming. Therefore, statewide, we would expect the [hardiness] zones would shift northwards."
When the hardiness zone maps inevitably shift, the most significant information it will provide for gardeners in Maine will be what perennial crops will thrive where they live.
"For perennials that have to survive all year round, if it becomes warmer, it may be less risky," said Peter Bretting, Crop Production and Protection National Program Leader at the USDA. "[Gardeners] might be more adventurous and try to grow crops that up until a certain time point might have been quite risky to grow in their particular location. The plant hardiness statistic will help with that."
However, Mallory said that the dynamics of warming weather are often more complicated than gardeners anticipate.
"For some crops like apples and blueberries, earlier warming in the spring can increase the risk of frost or freeze damage because plants develop earlier relative to the last frost date," Mallory said. "As well, we're projected to have wetter springs, which means that even if the season starts earlier temperature wise, in many years wet soils could prevent growers from taking advantage of the earlier warming."
Warming temperatures may also change the timeline for growing popular crops.
"Growers have had issues with warmer fall temperatures speeding up the development of a crop like broccoli, where multiple plantings matured almost all at once instead of over the course of a few weeks causing an unexpected glut," Mallory said. "Growers are needing to adjust planting schedules."
Crops like winter grains that need cooler temperatures might suffer as temperatures continue to warm and hardiness zones shift.
"Under ideal conditions, [winter grains] are protected from harsh winter conditions by a layer of snow, but, in Maine, farmers are increasingly having trouble with winter kill," Mallory said. "In some cases, our first snow occurs before soil temperatures have dropped below freezing, which creates an ideal environment for a disease called snow mold. We've also seen an increase in ice damage, where a winter thaw is followed by hard freeze and an ice layer forms and smothers the plants."
Bretting also emphasized that hardiness zone maps are just one "tool in a multitool toolbox" for figuring out what to plant for a healthy, thriving garden. Growers should pay attention to local microclimates, and keep track of other relevant data like precipitation and maximum temperature as they make decisions about whether a plant is suitable for their location.
Still, the shift in hardiness zones is likely not the most significant change for growers that will come with the changing climate, Mallory said.
"Just thinking about changing hardiness zones is deceptive because climate change is not just about shifts in averages," Mallory said. "It's also, importantly, about increases in weather variability and weather extremes. I think learning to cope with those changes will be much more challenging."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (89%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); OCEANOGRAPHIC & ATMOSPHERIC SERVICES (89%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (77%); WEATHER (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (83%); UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (57%)

Industry: AGRICULTURE (90%); AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENTS (89%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (94%); OREGON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: July 29, 2021


End of Document


Janet Mills moves Maine in right direction on climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 4, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 Bangor Daily News
Length: 688 words
Body


Gov. Janet Mills is taking climate change seriously and has made it one of her top priorities. That is an important change for Maine.
Former Gov. Paul LePage was a climate change skeptic who stalled action, and even study, of the changing climate in Maine and actively drove some renewable energy development, notably offshore wind, out of the state.
Mills is reversing course, although the details of how she proposes to make Maine a more environmentally friendly state remain vague.
Last week, Mills took two important, if small, steps to put Maine into the category of states that are taking direct action to address climate change. On Thursday, she announced the state would join the U.S. Climate Alliance, a group of 21 states and Puerto Rico that have committed to reducing their greenhouse gas emissions and to creating policies to develop cleaner energy. The states in the coalition represent more than half of the U.S. population and a third of 2016 energy-related carbon emissions, according to federal data.
Mills also withdrew Maine from a pro-offshore drilling group of governors. The state was a member under LePage. This move is somewhat symbolic, as offshore drilling is unlikely off the Maine coast because there are not significant oil and gas reserves there. But, it serves as an important reversal on one of the state's misguided energy policies.
Mills also said last week that she would present legislation to form a state-level climate council to develop a plan for Maine to meet carbon reduction goals, which she pegged at achieving 80 percent renewable energy in the electricity industry by 2030 and 100 percent by 2050. The group would also develop plans to ensure that Maine's communities and economy are resilient to the effects of climate change. It will include commissioners, science and technical experts, nonprofit leaders, and representatives of climate-impacted industries.
This is important work, which should have been started years ago.
In 2013, LePage vetoed a bill that called for a study of what Maine could do to protect itself from the effects of climate change. The veto was unfortunately sustained. This left the state behind in preparing for the consequences of climate change, both positive -- such as longer growing and tourist seasons -- and negative, such as an increase in diseases transmitted by ticks and other insects and rising ocean temperatures, which could hurt lobster and other valuable seafood harvests.
Climate change, of course, is a global and national issue. But, with a lack of action -- and, in fact, many steps backward -- from the Trump administration, states have been left to develop their own plans to combat rising temperatures, more unpredictable weather, more frequent natural disasters and other consequences of climate change.
Speaking to the Environmental and Energy Technology Council of Maine (E2Tech) on Thursday, Mills previewed where her administration would focus. A key area is transportation, which accounts for more than half the state's carbon dioxide emissions, Mills said. In a rural state with limited public transportation, this will be difficult, but necessary work.
The governor said her administration will also work to make solar energy technology more accessible to Maine, to increase the use of heat pumps and to support development of offshore wind technology at the University of Maine.
Much of this work will require the support of lawmakers, some of whom, like LePage, remain skeptical of climate change or are wary about the costs of moving to cleaner energy sources. These costs, which will hit consumers and businesses, cannot be ignored. But, these investments must be weighed against the growing expense -- both in terms of money and human well-being -- of not taking appropriate steps to prepare for and ameliorate the consequences of climate change.
Mills has put Maine on the right track to consider climate change in a more serious, comprehensive manner. As with any big change, the next challenge will be convincing lawmakers and the public of the need for big changes and big investments to reduce our collective carbon footprint.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (90%); OFFSHORE ENERGY (90%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); RENEWABLE ENERGY INDUSTRY (89%); VETO (89%); GOVERNORS (79%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (77%); ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (77%); OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY (77%); WIND ENERGY INDUSTRY (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); POPULATION SIZE (73%); LEGISLATION (72%); NEGATIVE NEWS (62%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (62%); INSECTS & ARACHNIDS (60%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (60%); NATURAL DISASTERS (50%); TICK BORNE DISEASES (50%)

Industry: ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); OFFSHORE ENERGY (90%); OFFSHORE OIL & GAS EXPLORATION & EXTRACTION (90%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (90%); ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (89%); RENEWABLE ENERGY INDUSTRY (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (77%); ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (77%); OFFSHORE WIND ENERGY (77%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (77%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (77%); WIND ENERGY INDUSTRY (77%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (50%); TOURISM (50%)

Person: JANET MILLS (92%); PAUL LEPAGE (79%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (95%); PUERTO RICO (79%)

Load-Date: March 5, 2019


End of Document


UMaine team researching ways to help farmers adapt to climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
November 5, 2018 Monday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 823 words
Byline: Julia Bayly BDN Staff
Body


Farming has always been a risky and unpredictable way to make a living, and according to researchers at the University of Maine in Orono, fluctuating weather conditions associated with climate change are only adding to the unpredictability.
"Farmers have always had to deal with weather and changing conditions," said Dr. Eric Gallandt, professor of weed ecology at the University of Maine. "The [climate change] projections are that things are only going to get more variable."
Gallandt is part of a team sharing in a $500,000, three-year United States Agriculture and Food research grant looking at how to develop the tools and informational resources to help Maine's small and medium-sized farms better cope with climate-change related issues.
The University of Maine is sharing the USDA Food Research Initiative Agriculture Economics and Rural Communities: Small and Medium-Sized Farms program grant with researchers at the University of Vermont, which is looking at other areas in New England.
The University of Maine team was awarded $213,000 of the grant funds.
Changing weather patterns
"Farmers are seeing the effects of climate change right now," Gallandt said. "It used to be one of the great things in Maine that we had this great growing season where you could rely on timely rain over the season."
Over the past several years, Gallandt said, farmers have seen a change in that pattern.
"If you look at total [rain] we are getting as much as we ever did," he said. "But it's not coming at the right time."
More and more Maine farmers are dealing with drought conditions, Gallandt said.
"Maybe 20 years ago you did not need irrigation on your farm," he said, "But now more and more farmers are irrigating during crucial periods of the growing season."
Working with the farmers
The USDA grand funds will allow Gallandt and his team to meet one-on-one with farmers from around Maine to get a sense of what sorts of issues climate change is creating on the farms.
"We are really talking about farmers dealing with increasingly dramatic fluctuations in weather events," said Tori Jackson, educator with the University of Maine Cooperative Extension and research team member. "I spend a lot of time working with beginning farmers and there is an opportunity here to help them make decisions so they are able to plan for climate change issues."
Among those weather fluctuations are droughts, heavy rain and wind storms, sudden spring freeze-ups and warmer end of season conditions, Jackson said.
"There is virtually no farmer in Maine who should not be concerned about climate change," Jackson said. "Irrigation is a big one -- they need to be thinking how to get water to livestock or crops as what used to be dependable water sources dry up year after year."
Information gathered through interviewing farmers and determining what they are facing as the Maine climate changes, will help the team formulate a solid plan for those and future farmers.
These farmers, according to Gallandt, are looking for credible information on how to best manage their farms under those changing conditions.
Looking for solutions
"Adapting to a changing climate will require specialized outreach efforts and resources to ensure continued farm viability," he said. "We want to provide farmer with backup plans so when things like droughts or major crop-impacting weather fluctuations occur, those crops won't be damaged."
Changes in storage techniques, irrigation, use of greenhouses, crop rotation and considering different crops are among the strategies that could help farmers, Gallandt said.
Rather than the team of researchers sitting around a table and discussing the climate change trends, Gallandt said they will go out and talk to the farmers on the ground to get a sense of what they are dealing with.
"Right now we are working on a model on how best to engage those farmers," he said. "By understanding our stakeholders before we start developing those educational materials and strategies will be more on point for what they need."
Gallandt said the team is in the early stages of developing the questions they want to ask farmers and hope to ge out talking to them by the first of the year.
The team will then spend next summer looking at the responses and spend six months to a year developing those strategies and plans to help farmers deal with climate change.
"Farmers need to be prepared for continued climate change," Jackson said. "We want to help them have plans in place to meet these changes."
Working on the UMaine team with Gallandt and Jackson are Dr. Adam Daigneault with the school of forest resources and graduate students Sonja Birthisel and Ruth Sexton.
The team is collaborating with the USDA Northeast Climate Hub, Maine Organic Farmers and Growers Association, the Beginning Farmer Resource Network of Maine, University of Vermont's New Farmer Project, the Women's Agricultural Network and the Institute for Social and Economic Development.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); GRANTS & GIFTS (90%); WEATHER (90%); AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY REGULATION (89%); DROUGHT (89%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (76%); SCIENCE FUNDING (76%); WATER RESOURCES (76%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); SEVERE WIND (73%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (94%); UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT (56%)

Industry: AGRICULTURE (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (90%); AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY REGULATION (89%); LIVESTOCK (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (95%); VERMONT, USA (79%); NORTHEAST USA (74%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: November 5, 2018


End of Document


Maine gardeners facing realities, challenges of climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
April 6, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1224 words
Byline: Julia Bayly BDN Staff
Body


Hammon Buck has been working with Maine gardeners for more than half a century, and in those five decades he's seen what a warming trend and climate change are doing to the region's growing seasons.
"As a child there were a lot of things we could not grow [in Maine] that are now common like Magnolia, weeping cherries and some of the locust trees," Buck, owner of Plants Unlimited in Rockport, said. "Now those things are quite common with the warming up."
A noticeable change
Buck is not alone in noticing things are changing in accordance with a continued climate shift.
"A lot of the plant diseases that used to be confined to certain areas of the south are starting to move north," said Pete Zuck, product manager for vegetables at Johnny's Selected Seeds. "Viruses that are transported by southern bugs that would be killed off by frost here are gaining ground moving north."
In recognition of the impact climate change is having on planting, in 2012 the USDA released an updated version of its plant hardiness zone map, which is used by gardeners to determine what flowers, fruits or vegetables grow best in their particular region -- or zone.
It's previous map was released in 1990.
"The planting zones have definitely changed," Buck said. "We were always a constant zone five but now we are a warmer five with some areas going to zone six."
What this means to those who plant in Maine, according to climate change experts, is the state's growing seasons have lengthened, allowing for the introduction of newer crops.
"I think in this is instance climate change is in some ways potentially helpful for the home gardner," said Dr. John Jemison, professor with University of Maine Cooperative Extension. "That's a broad brush statement, but a longer season does mean they can grow things they were not able to before and can extend the growing season a bit longer."
But as helpful as a longer season could be for growing plants and food in Maine, Jemison said it also comes at a cost.
"With this change in climate also comes a lot of other issues," he said. "There is really no other issue more important to the longevity of humans than climate change."
According to the University of Maine Climate and Agriculture Network, the average length of Maine's frost-free growing season is currently 12 to 14 days longer than it was in 1930 and is expected to continue to increase by 2 to 3 days per decade.
Along with this, the minimum winter temperatures in Maine are increasing a rate faster than the daily highs in the other seasons.
With warmer winters, according to the climate network, Maine is also in store for more frequent and intense heat waves during which the feel-like temperature will break 95-degrees.
With the predicted added risk of heatwaves comes more frequent and extreme downpours, according to the agriculture and climate network.
The network's data shows the frequency of extreme precipitation events in Maine increased 74 percent between 1948 and 2011. Intense storms that used to hit around every 12 months are now occurring every seven months with the maximum hourly rate of precipitation increasing around 35 percent between 2001 and 2013.
The network predicts the frequency and intensity of these extreme weather events will continue over the coming decades bringing risks of increased soil erosion, seed loss, flooding and nutrient runoff.
When it rains, it pours
"One thing that gets to me is this intensity in rainfall," said Glen Koehler, of the University of Maine Cooperative Extension pest management office. "I started in this 30 years ago and at that time more than an inch of rain in 24 hours we unusual, now -- while still not typical -- it is happening with more frequency."
Koehler, who works with Maine's fruit tree growers, said his farmers have observed the annual rainfall in the state creeping up, but not in a manner beneficial to their crops.
"You see more rain so you think well, no drought," Koehler said. "But in reality the increased rain is coming in 'pulses' and if you go several weeks with no rain, your crops are going to get thirsty and irrigation becomes more important."
In fact, supplemental watering has become more important at Johnny's Seeds, according to Zuck.
"We are still seeing Maine get its 45 inches of precipitation a year, but it's becoming less spread out, more sporadic and in larger amounts when it does rain," Zuck said. "Here at Johnny's we never had to irrigate, but the last two drought years did a lot of damage so we have upgraded nad installed irrigation where we never had it in the past."
As far as home gardening is concerned, Jemison, who has been gardening in Maine for 25 years, said planters need to be prepared for these sporadic rains that he said seem to be creating wetter spring months in Maine.
"Temperatures may be warmer in the spring, but we still seemingly are pushed later for planting because things are so wet," he said. "One way to deal with that instead of waiting for things to dry out is to make raised garden beds, with good soil drainage."
Best practices
Climate change, he said, is only going to exacerbate plant diseases and pest issues and he said the best way for the home gardener to battle that is practicing the best gardening possible.
"Having those raised beds really helps dry out the soils," he said. "That, in turn, helps decrease those diseases and pests that love moist conditions."
Building organic material into the soil also helps with supplying important nutrients to plants and with proper water drainage, Jemison said.
"I'm a real fan of my raised beds," he said. "I tend to use bark mulch in the pathways between the beds to help with drainage and slow erosion [and] use black plastic to help warm the soil."
Jemison also suggests creating methods to capture and store rainwater for use during dry periods.
Gardeners may be tempted to start planting as soon as the weather seems warmer, but Jemison cautions against going all in with what seems to be early springs.
"You may see a lot of early warm weather and 'mama nature' says 'I want to start to leaf out and flower,' and then she gets hit with a late frost or unexpected cold snap," he said. "I tell people if they really want to put things in the ground early to start, think twice [because] we are still at risk for the cold snaps."
If someone is determined to get that early outside planting start, Jemison recommends planting things that are easily and inexpensively re-planted like greens, instead of more costly things like fruit trees.
Trust what has worked
When it comes to what to plant, Buck, whose business celebrates its 40th anniversary this year, recommends sticking with what has worked in the psat, despite what zone changes may have occurred in Maine, or at least doing some homework before planting.
"Warming conditions do offer up some new plants we can grow," he said. "But don't bite on every new seed that comes along [and] understand if you are going to experiment with zones, you are taking a risk."
The key, he said, is to find out if the seed has been thoroughly tested.
"I've seen a lot of plants and seeds that are supposed to be hardy for a specific zone, but are not," Buck said. "If you live in a zone 5, plant for a zone 5 [and] if you want to dabble in zone 6, go for it, but understand the risks."
Follow the Bangor Daily News on Facebook for the latest Maine news.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); TRENDS (89%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); HEAT WAVES (78%); WEATHER (78%); LIFE EXPECTANCY (74%); AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY REGULATION (72%); PRODUCT MANAGEMENT (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%)

Industry: FRUITS & VEGETABLES (90%); AGRICULTURE (89%); AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY REGULATION (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (93%)

Load-Date: April 6, 2018


End of Document


Science predicted the eclipse, so why do so many doubt climate change?
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
August 23, 2017 Wednesday


Copyright 2017 Bangor Daily News
Length: 685 words
Body


On Monday, millions of people donned special glasses or peered through cardboard boxes to get a glimpse of the solar eclipse. People from around the globe flocked to spots in Oregon, Wyoming, Kentucky and other states to be in the best place to see the total eclipse. They were ready at the precise time that NASA said the eclipse would happen.
No one doubted that there would be an eclipse. No one said the scientists couldn't possibly predict the path of the sun and moon and precisely know when they would overlap. No one said that the path of totality, derived from scientific models, was a hoax.
Instead, people, including President Donald Trump, gathered at the time designated by scientists to see the moon cover all or, as was the case in Maine, a portion of the sun. It was the first time since 1918 that a total solar eclipse was visible in a swath that stretched from coast to coast in the United States. People described the eclipse as amazing and incredible.
Yet, when it comes to vaccines, climate change, pollution and other areas where there is a scientific consensus, people are quick to cast doubt on science.
This is especially true of the Trump administration and climate change, where 97 percent of climate scientists agree that climate change is happening and that human activities are a major contributor. Trump's actions -- such as withdrawing the U.S. from the Paris climate accord and appointing former Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt to head the very agency he sued numerous times to negate climate change-related rules -- show that his administration is hostile to reducing emissions to ease climate change in favor of the fossil fuel industry.
Just days before the eclipse, the Trump administration disbanded a climate change advisory panel. The panel, made up of scientists, industry representatives and local officials, was responsible for translating complex scientific reports into useable and understandable information for government agencies. Members of the committee fear that a forthcoming climate assessment done by 13 federal agencies, which is currently being reviewed by the administration, will be shelved or released without the necessary context for it to be useful.
The administration has not said why it ended the Advisory Committee for the National Climate Assessment.
Jessica Whitehead, a coastal communities hazards adaptation specialist in North Carolina, who also sat on the committee, told CNN, "We helped the science make sense."
"It's now going to be a big challenge for government entities to easily understand how to use the science when making decisions on things like land use and infrastructure," she said. "If states or towns, for example, need to install new storm-water pipes, those pipes won't be very effective if they make those decisions without a good understanding of the science of climate change and how it's impacting that community."
Trump made this problem worse last week by signing an executive order eliminating requirements that projects built in flood zones, and financed with federal money, take into consideration the consequences of climate change, such as increased flood risk, when designing projects. The Obama administration put the standards in place to better shield taxpayers from costly flood insurance claims.
Last week, the Trump administration also ended a policy encouraging national parks to stop selling bottled water. The policy was meant to curb plastic waste.
The administration also is ending a study of the health effects of mountaintop removal. The study of the coal mining method, which is being done by the National Academy of Sciences, had been requested by the West Virginia Bureau of Public Health and Department of Environmental Protection. Previous studies raised concerns about increased risk of cancer, birth defects and premature death among residents living near large surface coal-mining operations.
These are dangerous and short-sighted actions that will leave the U.S. more vulnerable to the changing climate, which, just like a solar eclipse, can't be stopped because some don't agree with the science.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); COASTAL AREAS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); SPACE PROGRAMS (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); EMISSIONS (77%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (77%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (77%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (77%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (74%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (66%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (64%); VACCINES (54%)

Industry: SPACE PROGRAMS (78%); EMISSIONS (77%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (77%); VACCINES (54%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); SCOTT PRUITT (79%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); KENTUCKY, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: August 23, 2017


End of Document


Curbing climate change has a dollar value. This is how we measure it.
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 16, 2017 Thursday


Copyright 2017 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1384 words
Byline: Christopher Burns BDN Staff
Body


President Donald Trump is expected to issue an executive order soon to reverse Obama-era rules to cut carbon pollution, including a moratorium on leasing public lands for coal mining and a plan to reduce carbon emissions from power plants.
Trump and his appointees argue that these steps will bring coal miners' jobs back (although coal industry job losses reflect competition from cheap natural gas, not regulations that have yet to take effect). But they ignore the fact that mitigating climate change will produce large economic gains.
While burning fossil fuels produces benefits, such as powering the electric grid and fueling cars, it also generates widespread costs to society -- including damages from climate change that affect people around the world now and in the future. Public policies that reduce carbon pollution deliver benefits by avoiding these damages.
Since the Reagan administration, federal agencies have been required to enact only regulations whose potential benefits to society justify or outweigh their potential costs. To quantify benefits from acting to curb climate change, the U.S. government developed a formal measure in 2009 of the value of reducing carbon pollution, which is referred to as the social cost of carbon, or SCC. Currently, federal agencies use an SCC figure of about $40 per ton in today's dollars.
Now the Trump administration and critics in Congress may reduce this figure or even stop using it. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Scott Pruitt's recent comment that carbon dioxide is not "a primary contributor" to climate change suggests that Pruitt may challenge the agency's 2009 finding that carbon emissions are pollutants and threaten human health.
As an economist for the White House, I was a member of the working group that developed the first government-wide SCC estimate. We can always improve our processes for estimating and using the SCC, but getting rid of it would be a mistake. A well-functioning democracy needs transparency about the economic benefits of investments driven by public policy -- as well as the benefits we give up when we walk away from making these investments.The value of avoiding hurricanes, wildfires
Scientists widely agree that carbon dioxide emissions, primarily from burning fossil fuels, pose significant risks to Earth's climate. Intuitively, it makes sense that reducing carbon emissions benefits society by reducing risks of flooding, wildfires, storms and other impacts associated with severe climate change.
We can estimate the benefits of many goods and services, from pop music to recreation, from the prices people pay for them in markets. But valuing environmental benefits is not so simple. Americans can't go to the store and buy a stable climate.
Carbon pollution drives global warming that causes many different impacts on the natural and built environment and human health. Because carbon emissions have such broad and diverse impacts, scholars have developed models to characterize the economic benefits (or costs) of reducing them.
Current U.S. government practice draws from three peer-reviewed integrated assessment models. An integrated assessment model represents a chain of events, starting with economic activities that involve fossil fuel combustion. This generates carbon emissions, which contribute to climate change.
And climate change causes outcomes that can be measured in monetary terms. For example, rising carbon pollution will increase the likelihood of lower agricultural yields, threaten public health through heat stress, and damage infrastructure through floods and intense storms.Thousands of scenarios
The social cost of carbon represents the damages of 1 ton of carbon dioxide emitted into the air. To estimate it, economists run models that forecast varying levels of carbon dioxide emissions. They can then model and compare two forecasts -- one with slightly higher emissions than the other. The difference in total climate change damages represents the social cost of carbon.
Carbon pollution can remain in the atmosphere for up to 200 years, so these models are run over a century or more in order to account for long-term damages that carbon emissions impose on society.
SCC estimates are based on chains of events that include many uncertainties -- for example, how many tons of carbon will be emitted in a given year, the amount of warming that will result, and how severely this warming will exacerbate risks like floods and heat waves. Since we cannot predict any single scenario with certainty, the U.S. government has modeled hundreds of thousands of different scenarios to produce its SCC estimates.
Some model scenarios, based on admittedly extreme assumptions, produce negative SCC estimates; that is, they find that carbon pollution is good for the planet. But the vast majority of scenarios show that carbon pollution is bad for the planet, and that on average, every ton of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere imposes damages equal to about $40 in today's dollars.Balancing costs, benefits of regulations
The federal government began calculating a social cost of carbon after the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled in 2007 that the U.S. Department of Transportation had to account for climate benefits from its regulations to improve automobile fuel economy. Environmental groups and a dozen states challenged the regulations, in part because the Bush administration had valued the benefits of cutting carbon dioxide emissions at zero.
In response, the Obama administration created a working group in 2009 with officials from 12 agencies to develop the federal government's first official SCC estimate. Our initial figure of $25 for 2010 was updated in 2013, 2015 and 2016, reflecting updates in the underlying models.
Agencies have used these estimates in benefit-cost analyses for scores of federal regulations, including the Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Power Plan, the Department of Transportation's medium and heavy-duty vehicle fuel economy standards, and the U.S. Department of Energy's minimum efficiency standard for refrigerators and freezers. Some of these studies were required only by executive order, but others were required by law. Unless the authorizing statutes are amended, the Trump administration will have to produce analyses accounting for carbon pollution reduction benefits if it wants to issue new regulations that can withstand legal challenges.
The Trump administration could continue to use SCC estimates in regulatory evaluations, but water them down. For example, some scholars have called for focusing only on domestic benefits -- as opposed to total global benefits -- of reducing carbon pollution in the United States. Emitting a ton of carbon imposes damages in the U.S. and around the world, just as a ton emitted in Beijing imposes damages on the U.S. and other countries around the world. Considering only the domestic impacts of carbon pollution could lower the SCC by three-quarters.
But if the U.S. ignores the benefits of reducing carbon pollution that other countries enjoy, then those other countries may follow suit and consider only how cutting emissions will benefit them internally. This approach ignores the strategic value that serves as the primary motivation for countries to work together to combat climate change. The world would achieve much greater emissions reductions and greater net economic benefits if countries implement policies based on the global social cost of carbon instead of a domestic-only SCC.
As climate change science and economics continue to evolve, our tools for estimating benefits from reducing carbon pollution will need to evolve and improve. In January the National Academies of Sciences published a report that lays out an extensive research agenda for improving the estimation and use of the social cost of carbon.
The federal government has used used benefit-cost analysis to calculate society's bottom line from regulations for decades. So far, the Trump administration appears to be focused solely on costs -- an approach that maximizes the corporate bottom line, but leaves the public out of the equation.
Joseph Aldy is an associate professor of public policy at Harvard University. This piece was originally published on TheConversation.com.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); AIR POLLUTION (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (89%); FIRES (89%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); DEMOCRACIES (79%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION (78%); INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (78%); MINING & ENVIRONMENT (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); LAYOFFS (77%); MINE WORKERS (77%); PRICES (77%); WEATHER (77%); ECONOMICS (75%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (75%); WILDFIRES (75%); CONSERVATION (73%); PUBLIC LANDS (73%); GLOBAL WARMING (72%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (63%); POP & ROCK (50%)

Industry: COAL INDUSTRY (90%); COAL MINING (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (89%); MINING & ENVIRONMENT (78%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (77%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (77%); FOSSIL FUEL POWER PLANTS (77%); MINE WORKERS (77%); NATURAL GAS (77%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (77%); GLOBAL WARMING (72%); OIL & GAS REGULATION & POLICY (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); SCOTT PRUITT (79%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); EARTH (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: March 17, 2017


End of Document


Climate change demands our attention on Election Day and beyond
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
October 29, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Bangor Daily News
Length: 609 words
Body


The BDN Opinion section operates independently and does not set newsroom policies or contribute to reporting or editing articles elsewhere in the newspaper or on bangordailynews.com.
William Lauring Somes is a political science and economics major at the University of Maine.
As Maine's environment continues to change, solutions to the climate problem are becoming more and more important. My conversations with fishermen have led me to believe lobsters are already moving further away from shore, and scientific evidence suggests this trend will continue over the next 80 years. Of course, this is far from the only impact of climate change. In the coming years, heavy rains related to changes in climate can cause damage to Maine agriculture and infrastructure.
Climate change is an economic problem, and our livelihoods depend on how we address it.
The transportation sector accounts for the majority of all climate-warming emissions in Maine (approximately 54 percent). This means that efforts to combat climate change must focus specifically on reducing emissions from this sector.
In March of this year, the Environmental Protection Agency rolled back fuel economy standards that would have raised the new vehicle fuel economy to 54 miles per gallon. Under these rollbacks, rather than increasing fuel economy by 5 percent per year, automakers must instead increase fuel economy by just 1.5 percent per year. This equates to a 14 miles-per-gallon decline in fuel efficiency over the next four years as compared to the original standards.
In other words, at the most crucial moment in American history, we are moving backwards, not forwards.
Maine is already starting to take action. The Maine Climate Council, established in 2019, is addressing emissions from the transportation sector. Specifically, it is considering proposals to expand public transportation and increase rebates for electric vehicles.
The Transportation and Climate Initiative is another forthcoming solution. If Maine signs on to the initiative, this could mean more investment in climate-friendly transportation for disadvantaged communities.
But while Maine politicians and bureaucrats continue problem-solving, we must remember the importance of individual citizens. Policy doesn't just happen; it is influenced, refined, and implemented with Mainers' health and wellbeing in mind.
Of course, the process isn't always perfect, and politicians sometimes put their own interests first. For example, Gov. Paul LePage vetoed more than 600 bills over the course of his eight years in office. For perspective, if you sum all the vetoes of Maine governors since World War II, this would still be less than LePage accumulated in his two terms in the Blaine House.
Looking forward, Mainers need a government that will address climate solutions sooner rather than later. Fortunately, at least our state government is moving in the right direction. Unfortunately, the federal government still has a long way to go. As citizens of a republic, it is our duty to vote for representatives that protect the environment. Mainers' livelihoods depend on it.
But this isn't about politics -- or at least it shouldn't be. Climate change affects us all, regardless of the political ideology we subscribe to. It is really more of an economics issue than anything else, and economics and climate solutions can go hand in hand. In fact, switching to a green economy could result in a net increase in jobs.
Over the next few decades, the Maine way of life could change dramatically. It all depends on us: what we choose to care about, the future we decide for our children, and the steps we take to get us there.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (92%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ECONOMICS (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); VETO (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (77%); CONSERVATION (77%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (77%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (77%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (73%); SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION (73%); WEATHER (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (72%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (71%); WORLD WAR II (67%); ELECTRIC MOBILITY (66%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (66%); HISTORY (64%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (63%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (50%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (58%); US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (55%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (90%); TRANSPORTATION & WAREHOUSING (88%); AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (77%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (77%); SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION (73%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (71%); PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (67%); ELECTRIC MOBILITY (66%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (66%); AUTOMAKERS (51%); AUTOMOBILE MFG (51%)

Person: PAUL LEPAGE (58%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2020


End of Document


Follow the money in the climate change debate; A mandatory, flexible climate program is good for business, according to 10 top U.S. CEOs.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
January 24, 2007 Wednesday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A11
Length: 778 words
Byline: Theo Stein Editorial Writer
Body


The United States ''can and must'' take prompt comprehensive action to reduce emissions of climate-changing pollution.
So sayeth an unusual and refreshing group of global warming converts - 10 CEOs who lead some the country's biggest corporations, including Alcoa, General Electric, BP America, Caterpillar, Dupont and Duke Energy.
They're not talking voluntary action here, either, but a mandatory, cap-and-trade system with limits set by the federal government.
Monday's announcement by the newly formed U.S. Climate Action Partnership sets a politically inconvenient benchmark for President Bush on the eve of his sixth State of the Union address.
It also highlights that the focus of the climate change debate is shifting from politics to economics. And the money is leaving lawmakers in its wake.
Financial pressure is forcing major players in the energy industry to fundamentally rethink how they're doing business. Many see global warming regulations as inevitable and are trying to avoid the future costs and liabilities associated with facilities that emit high levels of carbon dioxide.
Plans for a host of coal plants across the west have either been scrapped or are dying on the vine. Some companies, like Minneapolis-based Xcel Energy, are switching their focus to coal gasification, which allows carbon to be sequestered from the waste stream.
San Diego-based Sempra Energy not only killed plans to build coal plants in Nevada and New Mexico that would have supplied 2,000 megawatts of energy, it decided to get out of the coal business altogether.
Sempra's decision was driven in part by one of two laws recently signed by Republican Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger.
The first sets up a greenhouse gas cap-and-trade system. The second, the one Sempra reacted to, prohibits any utility in the state from contracting for power with a plant that fails to meet state CO2 emission standards.
While the U.S. Climate Change Action Partnership's call may be startling in its candor, it represents a solid middle ground in the evolving argument over how to address climate change.
The United States now knows enough about climate change to justify action, the group said. And acting sooner rather than later will preserve valuable response options, provide greater certainty to industry and reduce the impacts of a changing climate on the economy.
The plan endorsed by the group calls for slowing the growth of carbon dioxide emissions over the next five years followed by cuts that reduce pollution levels by 10 to 30 percent from today's levels in the subsequent decade.
By contrast, President Bush is expected to call for a 20 percent reduction in gasoline usage over the next 10 years by sharply increasing the mix of renewable fuels like ethanol and by increasing economy standards for passenger cars.
That's a good start: Burning less fuel is the cheapest way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector, which accounts for about 33 percent of U.S. energy-related greenhouse gas pollution.
But it's not nearly enough.
Although the U.S. Climate Action Partnership also includes four environmental organizations, it's not like the greenies kidnapped the CEOs and brainwashed them in some incense-fogged ashram. The clear strains of enlightened self-interest can be heard in their call to action.
The CEOs said they were motivated in part by strong but unlinked state efforts that have been led, often enough, by Republicans. (California's cap-and-trade market follows the northeastern states' Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, which was launched by Gov. George Pataki, R-N.Y.) A coordinated national plan would avert a quilt of potentially conflicting state regulations.
''That was a catalyst for us,'' Caterpillar CEO Jim Owens told the San Jose Mercury News. ''It's not very efficient to have states doing different things. We need a national policy.''
The CEOs also see a profitable upside to the changing energy paradigm. Like other challenges the country has faced, climate change will create opportunities for companies that are willing to adapt by becoming more efficient and investing in new technologies.
Innovation will lead to increased U.S. competitiveness, increased energy security and an improved balance of trade.
''We believe that a national mandatory policy on climate change will provide the basis for the United States to assert world leadership in environmental and energy technology innovation, a national characteristic for which the U.S. has no rival,'' their report says.
Who can argue with that?
Theo Stein is an editorial writer for the Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram and can be contacted at 791-6481 or:
tstein@pressherald.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (90%); GREENHOUSE GASES (89%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS (89%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (88%); MINING OUTPUT (88%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); COAL GASIFICATION (78%); EMISSIONS CREDITS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (78%); US ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (76%); POLITICS (75%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (75%); ALTERNATIVE AVIATION FUELS (74%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS STANDARDS (72%); NEW MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (66%)

Company:  SEMPRA ENERGY (71%);  DUKE ENERGY CORP (58%);  BP AMERICA INC (58%);  GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (58%);  ALCOA INC (58%);  XCEL ENERGY INC (55%)

Ticker: SRE (NYSE) (71%); DUK (NYSE) (58%); GNE (PAR) (58%); GEC (LSE) (58%); GE (SWX) (58%); GE (NYSE) (58%); AAI (ASX) (58%); AA (NYSE) (58%); XEL (NYSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS221210 NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (71%); NAICS221122 ELECTRIC POWER DISTRIBUTION (71%); SIC4922 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION (71%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (71%); NAICS221112 FOSSIL FUEL ELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (58%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (58%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (58%); SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (58%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS335222 HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATOR & HOME FREEZER MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS335210 SMALL ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS331313 ALUMINA REFINING & PRIMARY ALUMINUM PRODUCTION (58%); SIC3334 PRIMARY PRODUCTION OF ALUMINUM (58%); NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (99%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (99%); ALUMINA & ALUMINUM PRODUCTION (91%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (91%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (91%); COAL FIRED PLANTS (90%); COAL INDUSTRY (90%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (90%); EMISSIONS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (90%); ENERGY & UTILITY TRADE (90%); FOSSIL FUEL POWER PLANTS (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCE MFG (90%); HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES (90%); MAJOR APPLIANCE MFG (90%); MANUFACTURING (90%); NATURAL GAS (90%); OIL & GAS FACILITIES (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); PETROLEUM & COAL PRODUCTS MFG (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); PETROLEUM REFINERIES (90%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (90%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS (89%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (88%); MINING OUTPUT (88%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (78%); COAL GASIFICATION (78%); EMISSIONS CREDITS (78%); CHEMICALS (77%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (77%); INORGANIC CHEMICALS MFG (77%); ENERGY & UTILITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (75%); ALTERNATIVE AVIATION FUELS (74%); BIOFUELS (74%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS STANDARDS (72%); ALCOHOLS (69%); ETHANOL (69%); NEW MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (66%); MOTOR VEHICLES (50%)

Person: ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (55%)

Geographic: PORTLAND, ME, USA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); NEVADA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: January 24, 2007


End of Document


Experts identify Maine wildlife, plants vulnerable to climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 12, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1350 words
Byline: Aislinn Sarnacki BDN Staff
Body


Hard times may be ahead for Maine's moose, loons and salmon, according to a recent assessment released by the Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences. These iconic Maine animals are just a few of the many species predicted to run into challenges due to climate change.
"The Maine of tomorrow will not be the Maine I grew up with," said Andrew Whitman, director of the Sustainable Economies Initiative at Manomet and one of the seven authors of the assessment. "Species that are common to see may very well not be."
Climate change greatly increases the vulnerability of approximately one-third of Maine's species of conservation concern, according to the assessment, "Climate Change and Biodiversity in Maine: Vulnerability of Habitats and Priority Species," published August 2013.
The study included more than 100 biologists and rated the vulnerability of 442 Maine species -- vulnerability meaning "the degree to which a natural community or size of a species is likely to be diminished by changes in climate."
Each species was ranked as high, medium or low vulnerability. Of the 442 species assessed, 168 (37 percent) were ranked at high vulnerability, and another 171 species (38 percent) were ranked at medium vulnerability.
"I think, for the average man, there will be a lot of surprising outcomes. Even for professionals in the conservation fields, there will be, " said Steve Walker, project manager at Maine Coast Heritage Trust and an author of the assessment. "For me, the most surprising thing is that over 65 percent of the 400-some-odd species that were assessed by the scientific community came back as being highly or moderately vulnerable."
According to two climate change reports, researchers predict that by 2100, average temperatures in Maine will have increased 3-14 degrees Fahrenheit in the winter and 3-11 degrees in the summer. Precipitation is also projected to increase, especially in the winter.
Researchers also predict longer growing seasons, drier soil in late summer, shifting streams and rivers, a shorter snow season, a higher sea level (3-6 feet by 2100), warmer coastal seawater (6-10 degrees warmer by 2100), more carbon dioxide concentration in the air and more acidic oceans.
"It can be potentially paralyzing to try to deal with all of that," said Barbara Vickery of The Nature Conservancy, an author of the assessment. "But throughout this report, we've been able to tap into the knowledge of literally more than 100 experts to point us in the direction of the species that are predicted to be at the greatest risk so we can focus our efforts more intelligently."
The group of 168 species that ranked highly vulnerable to climate change includes fungi, lichen, alpine plants, wetland plants, invertebrates, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and a variety of birds and mammals.
"There are whole aspects of our biodiversity at risk, not narrow little slivers," Whitman said. "It's not like we might lose one or two things here or there that are a lot less common -- it's whole chunks of Maine that are at risk unless we think of creative ways to conserve them."
The 55 vertebrate species ranked as having high vulnerability to climate change include animals highly representative of Maine, such as as the landlocked salmon, the common loon, the Atlantic puffin and the eastern moose.
"If you travel to Canada, moose and loon are very common, but if you go to Massachusetts, they aren't," Vickery said. "Maine is right on kind of the border of what's an appropriate range for them, an appropriate habitat."
And birders, prepare to cringe. There's a large group of avians on the highly vulnerable vertebrates list, including harlequin duck, piping plover, spruce grouse, pine grosbeak, boreal chickadee and 37 other species.
Also on the vertebrates list are inland fish species -- whitefish, rainbow smelt, round whitefish and Arctic charr -- as well as Blanding's turtle, mink frog, northern bog lemming, snowshoe hare, Canada lynx and American marten. All have been deemed highly vulnerable to climate change.
While the results of the assessment may seem a bit bleak, its purpose is to provide knowledge that can guide future wildlife management.
"I hope that the average Maine citizen finds this document interesting and eye-opening, but I hope it isn't seen as discouraging," Walker said. "Unlike states in the south, we have a great opportunity here to create landscapes that species can adapt to in the face of climate change."
In the future, some of Maine's native species may head north, where more suitable habitat might be found in Canada. Likewise, species from southern states may find new homes in Maine.
"We really need to remember that animals live where they live for a whole variety of reasons, and if the climate of Maine is going to become more like a state south of us, we need to picture that the flora and fauna of Maine will eventually look more like those states than what we've got right now," said Vickery.
Maine isn't the only state predicting the future consequences of climate change. New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and other states have now released vulnerability analyses of their wildlife species in the process of revising their state wildlife action plans, also known as SWAPs, by 2015. Maine's plan, prepared by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, is called the Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation Strategy.
"If you look at Maine, we're in a better place in terms of conservation to cope with climate change than many other states," Whitman said. "Part of it is the amount of land we have and what has happened in terms of conservation.  People in Maine like to get out, get on the water, go hiking, go snowmobiling, enjoy nature's benefits. It's just Maine society. I've lived in other parts of the world, and there are few places I've ever been where people actually enjoy nature as much as I've seen here in Maine, and the land conservation wouldn't happen without that. And when you think of going forward with conservation and maintaining biodiversity in Maine, that won't happen unless that keeps going."
"There are things that can be done, and there are also things we can't do," Vickery said. "Unfortunately, we've already put so much greenhouse gas into the air, even if we all stopped driving tomorrow, the climate would continue to grow warmer.
"We have to acknowledge there is going to be change," she continued. "What we can do, perhaps, is reduce the rate of change.  What we can do is make sure we continue to have a wide variety of species around us, whether it's for hunting and fishing or bird watching -- I think there are things we can do for that."
"We keep coming back to what we've been promoting in the state of Maine for the past umpteen years," Walker said, "to maintain large blocks of continuous forest that are well connected, maintain buffers along streams, protect wetlands and shorelines -- as a society, we have to be really serious about actually implementing it now."
While the recent assessment is useful in planning for the future, projections are subject to change as biologists learn more. After all, an ecosystem is a complicated web, where one species may affect the fate of countless others, and a change in climate may affect a habitat in ways researchers have yet to understand.
"We haven't seen enough climate change to understand how things will play out," Whitman said. "We can concoct all the just-so stories about how things will happen, but they may not happen as we plan."
In addition to Whitman, Walker and Vickery, authors of the assessment are Andrew Cutko of Maine Department of Agriculture, Phillip deMaynadier of Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Sally Stockwell of Maine Audubon, and Robert Houston of U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Funding for assessment was provided by the Maine Outdoor Heritage Fund, The Nature Conservancy, Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and an anonymous donor.
To view the assessment, "Climate Change and Biodiversity in Maine: Vulnerability of Habitats and Priority Species," visit www.manomet.org and search under publications.
 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ANIMALS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONSERVATION (90%); MAMMALS (90%); WILDLIFE (90%); COASTAL AREAS (89%); FISHES (89%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (89%); WRITERS (89%); BIODIVERSITY (78%); BIOLOGY (78%); BIRDS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (78%); WETLANDS (78%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (73%); REPTILES & AMPHIBIANS (73%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); RIVERS (50%)

Industry: WRITERS (89%); GREEN ECONOMY (73%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (73%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (92%)

Load-Date: March 26, 2014


End of Document


Experts identify Maine wildlife, plants vulnerable to climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 12, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1350 words
Byline: Aislinn Sarnacki BDN Staff
Body


Hard times may be ahead for Maine's moose, loons and salmon, according to a recent assessment released by the Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences. These iconic Maine animals are just a few of the many species predicted to run into challenges due to climate change.
"The Maine of tomorrow will not be the Maine I grew up with," said Andrew Whitman, director of the Sustainable Economies Initiative at Manomet and one of the seven authors of the assessment. "Species that are common to see may very well not be."
Climate change greatly increases the vulnerability of approximately one-third of Maine's species of conservation concern, according to the assessment, "Climate Change and Biodiversity in Maine: Vulnerability of Habitats and Priority Species," published August 2013.
The study included more than 100 biologists and rated the vulnerability of 442 Maine species -- vulnerability meaning "the degree to which a natural community or size of a species is likely to be diminished by changes in climate."
Each species was ranked as high, medium or low vulnerability. Of the 442 species assessed, 168 (37 percent) were ranked at high vulnerability, and another 171 species (38 percent) were ranked at medium vulnerability.
"I think, for the average man, there will be a lot of surprising outcomes. Even for professionals in the conservation fields, there will be, " said Steve Walker, project manager at Maine Coast Heritage Trust and an author of the assessment. "For me, the most surprising thing is that over 65 percent of the 400-some-odd species that were assessed by the scientific community came back as being highly or moderately vulnerable."
According to two climate change reports, researchers predict that by 2100, average temperatures in Maine will have increased 3-14 degrees Fahrenheit in the winter and 3-11 degrees in the summer. Precipitation is also projected to increase, especially in the winter.
Researchers also predict longer growing seasons, drier soil in late summer, shifting streams and rivers, a shorter snow season, a higher sea level (3-6 feet by 2100), warmer coastal seawater (6-10 degrees warmer by 2100), more carbon dioxide concentration in the air and more acidic oceans.
"It can be potentially paralyzing to try to deal with all of that," said Barbara Vickery of The Nature Conservancy, an author of the assessment. "But throughout this report, we've been able to tap into the knowledge of literally more than 100 experts to point us in the direction of the species that are predicted to be at the greatest risk so we can focus our efforts more intelligently."
The group of 168 species that ranked highly vulnerable to climate change includes fungi, lichen, alpine plants, wetland plants, invertebrates, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and a variety of birds and mammals.
"There are whole aspects of our biodiversity at risk, not narrow little slivers," Whitman said. "It's not like we might lose one or two things here or there that are a lot less common -- it's whole chunks of Maine that are at risk unless we think of creative ways to conserve them."
The 55 vertebrate species ranked as having high vulnerability to climate change include animals highly representative of Maine, such as as the landlocked salmon, the common loon, the Atlantic puffin and the eastern moose.
"If you travel to Canada, moose and loon are very common, but if you go to Massachusetts, they aren't," Vickery said. "Maine is right on kind of the border of what's an appropriate range for them, an appropriate habitat."
And birders, prepare to cringe. There's a large group of avians on the highly vulnerable vertebrates list, including harlequin duck, piping plover, spruce grouse, pine grosbeak, boreal chickadee and 37 other species.
Also on the vertebrates list are inland fish species -- whitefish, rainbow smelt, round whitefish and Arctic charr -- as well as Blanding's turtle, mink frog, northern bog lemming, snowshoe hare, Canada lynx and American marten. All have been deemed highly vulnerable to climate change.
While the results of the assessment may seem a bit bleak, its purpose is to provide knowledge that can guide future wildlife management.
"I hope that the average Maine citizen finds this document interesting and eye-opening, but I hope it isn't seen as discouraging," Walker said. "Unlike states in the south, we have a great opportunity here to create landscapes that species can adapt to in the face of climate change."
In the future, some of Maine's native species may head north, where more suitable habitat might be found in Canada. Likewise, species from southern states may find new homes in Maine.
"We really need to remember that animals live where they live for a whole variety of reasons, and if the climate of Maine is going to become more like a state south of us, we need to picture that the flora and fauna of Maine will eventually look more like those states than what we've got right now," said Vickery.
Maine isn't the only state predicting the future consequences of climate change. New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and other states have now released vulnerability analyses of their wildlife species in the process of revising their state wildlife action plans, also known as SWAPs, by 2015. Maine's plan, prepared by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, is called the Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation Strategy.
"If you look at Maine, we're in a better place in terms of conservation to cope with climate change than many other states," Whitman said. "Part of it is the amount of land we have and what has happened in terms of conservation.  People in Maine like to get out, get on the water, go hiking, go snowmobiling, enjoy nature's benefits. It's just Maine society. I've lived in other parts of the world, and there are few places I've ever been where people actually enjoy nature as much as I've seen here in Maine, and the land conservation wouldn't happen without that. And when you think of going forward with conservation and maintaining biodiversity in Maine, that won't happen unless that keeps going."
"There are things that can be done, and there are also things we can't do," Vickery said. "Unfortunately, we've already put so much greenhouse gas into the air, even if we all stopped driving tomorrow, the climate would continue to grow warmer.
"We have to acknowledge there is going to be change," she continued. "What we can do, perhaps, is reduce the rate of change.  What we can do is make sure we continue to have a wide variety of species around us, whether it's for hunting and fishing or bird watching -- I think there are things we can do for that."
"We keep coming back to what we've been promoting in the state of Maine for the past umpteen years," Walker said, "to maintain large blocks of continuous forest that are well connected, maintain buffers along streams, protect wetlands and shorelines -- as a society, we have to be really serious about actually implementing it now."
While the recent assessment is useful in planning for the future, projections are subject to change as biologists learn more. After all, an ecosystem is a complicated web, where one species may affect the fate of countless others, and a change in climate may affect a habitat in ways researchers have yet to understand.
"We haven't seen enough climate change to understand how things will play out," Whitman said. "We can concoct all the just-so stories about how things will happen, but they may not happen as we plan."
In addition to Whitman, Walker and Vickery, authors of the assessment are Andrew Cutko of Maine Department of Agriculture, Phillip deMaynadier of Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Sally Stockwell of Maine Audubon, and Robert Houston of U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Funding for assessment was provided by the Maine Outdoor Heritage Fund, The Nature Conservancy, Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and an anonymous donor.
To view the assessment, "Climate Change and Biodiversity in Maine: Vulnerability of Habitats and Priority Species," visit www.manomet.org and search under publications.
 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ANIMALS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONSERVATION (90%); MAMMALS (90%); WILDLIFE (90%); COASTAL AREAS (89%); FISHES (89%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (89%); WRITERS (89%); BIODIVERSITY (78%); BIOLOGY (78%); BIRDS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (78%); WETLANDS (78%); WILDLIFE CONSERVATION (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (73%); REPTILES & AMPHIBIANS (73%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); RIVERS (50%)

Industry: WRITERS (89%); GREEN ECONOMY (73%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (73%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (92%)

Load-Date: March 25, 2014


End of Document


Friday, Sept. 22, 2017: Death of a dog, time to talk climate change, investigate DHHS negligence
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
September 20, 2017 Wednesday


Copyright 2017 Bangor Daily News
Length: 704 words
Body


Death of a dog
Emily Morrison's Sept. 2 BDN article about her dog's death brought back the bitter-sweet memory of our dog Pele's demise. Pele, who was named for the goddess of the Hawaiian volcano, was much beloved by my husband, me and our three kids.
Our delightful life with her came to a tragic ending when, one day, she was hit by a car and died. I couldn't stop crying. Unfortunately, I had to do something important at work that afternoon and, through my tears, started driving to my place of employment.
I had gotten only a few yards down our road when I spotted my son Steve walking toward home. I rolled down my window and, through my tears, said "The dog died." He thought I said "Dad died" and rushed home.
The next day at work, my boss noted my swollen face and asked what was the matter. His words started me crying again, and I tried to tell him that my dog had died. He misinterpreted my attempt to answer him and thought I said my daughter had died. He even asked me if I wanted the day off.
I knew I had to tell my parents about Pele because they, too, loved her very much. My father opened the letter with the bad news and read it to my mother. He didn't have his glasses on and misread "Pele" to be Pete. Peter was one of our sons.
Marjorie Dole
Bar HarborTime to talk climate change
Whenever there is a crisis such as a school shooting, concerned people want to discuss universal background checks or sensible gun control legislation. The response is always "now is not the time to bring up politics on this issue." To which they ask, "then when should we bring it up?"
Now that the U.S. has been hit by back-to-back strong hurricanes ( Harvey and Irma), I would like to ask our elected officials, "Now can we talk about climate change and sea level rise?" Scott Pruitt, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, said after Irma, " The time to talk climate change isn't now." Really?
Climate change is accepted science by the majority of climate scientists. And these same climate scientists agree that humans are having a significant impact on the changing climate. They predicted that hurricanes would be stronger, and more damaging. According to recent articles in this paper, the warming oceans are negatively affecting the fishing industry (a major part of Maine's economy) and creating stronger storms along the coast. We need to address this issue now.
The president has called climate change a Chinese hoax and has said the United States will withdraw from the Paris climate agreement, to the dismay of many state, local and business leaders. As concerned citizens, we need to educate ourselves, and we need to insist that our elected representatives address climate change in an open, honest and practical way. We shouldn't wait for the next major storm. It may be too late by then.
Jenni Casale
SurryInvestigate DHHS negligence
The recent audit from the Office of Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services of Maine's medical records and incident reports from January 2013 to June 2015 for 2,640 adult Medicaid beneficiaries with mental disabilities revealed that the Maine Department of Health and Human Services failed to investigate the deaths of 133 Mainers in the care of community-based providers. These auditors also discovered that nine of these deaths were unexplained, suspicious, or untimely, but not enough information about the other deaths to determine the category they fit into.
Gov. Paul LePage and then-DHHS Commissioner Mary Mayhew have stated time and time again that they look out for Maine's most vulnerable residents. Obviously, this is not true. As we all know, they always pass the buck, which in this case they passed to former Govs. John Baldacci and Angus King. But Mayhew was the DHHS commissioner and LePage was her boss during this period of time, so they are totally responsible for everything in the August audit.
Our Legislature should require an official investigation of all 133 deaths because someone needs to look out for Maine's most vulnerable residents. No one in the LePage administration has done anything except make excuses and cut funding, and these people and their families deserve answers to their questions.
David H. Crockett
Augusta
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: DEATH & DYING (91%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); WEATHER (89%); HURRICANE IRMA (79%); SHOOTINGS (79%); DOGS (78%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (77%); BUSINESS NEWS (77%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (72%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (67%); OCEAN ECONOMY (65%); GUN CONTROL (63%); SCHOOL VIOLENCE (63%); COASTAL AREAS (60%); CONSERVATION (60%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (60%); AGREEMENTS (50%)

Industry: AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (60%)

Person: SCOTT PRUITT (58%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: September 21, 2017


End of Document


Friday, Sept. 22, 2017: Death of a dog, time to talk climate change, investigate DHHS negligence
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
September 21, 2017 Thursday


Copyright 2017 Bangor Daily News
Length: 704 words
Body


Death of a dog
Emily Morrison's Sept. 2 BDN article about her dog's death brought back the bitter-sweet memory of our dog Pele's demise. Pele, who was named for the goddess of the Hawaiian volcano, was much beloved by my husband, me and our three kids.
Our delightful life with her came to a tragic ending when, one day, she was hit by a car and died. I couldn't stop crying. Unfortunately, I had to do something important at work that afternoon and, through my tears, started driving to my place of employment.
I had gotten only a few yards down our road when I spotted my son Steve walking toward home. I rolled down my window and, through my tears, said "The dog died." He thought I said "Dad died" and rushed home.
The next day at work, my boss noted my swollen face and asked what was the matter. His words started me crying again, and I tried to tell him that my dog had died. He misinterpreted my attempt to answer him and thought I said my daughter had died. He even asked me if I wanted the day off.
I knew I had to tell my parents about Pele because they, too, loved her very much. My father opened the letter with the bad news and read it to my mother. He didn't have his glasses on and misread "Pele" to be Pete. Peter was one of our sons.
Marjorie Dole
Bar Harbor
Time to talk climate change
Whenever there is a crisis such as a school shooting, concerned people want to discuss universal background checks or sensible gun control legislation. The response is always "now is not the time to bring up politics on this issue." To which they ask, "then when should we bring it up?"
Now that the U.S. has been hit by back-to-back strong hurricanes (Harvey and Irma), I would like to ask our elected officials, "Now can we talk about climate change and sea level rise?" Scott Pruitt, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, said after Irma, "The time to talk climate change isn't now." Really?
Climate change is accepted science by the majority of climate scientists. And these same climate scientists agree that humans are having a significant impact on the changing climate. They predicted that hurricanes would be stronger, and more damaging. According to recent articles in this paper, the warming oceans are negatively affecting the fishing industry (a major part of Maine's economy) and creating stronger storms along the coast. We need to address this issue now.
The president has called climate change a Chinese hoax and has said the United States will withdraw from the Paris climate agreement, to the dismay of many state, local and business leaders. As concerned citizens, we need to educate ourselves, and we need to insist that our elected representatives address climate change in an open, honest and practical way. We shouldn't wait for the next major storm. It may be too late by then.
Jenni Casale
Surry
Investigate DHHS negligence
The recent audit from the Office of Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services of Maine's medical records and incident reports from January 2013 to June 2015 for 2,640 adult Medicaid beneficiaries with mental disabilities revealed that the Maine Department of Health and Human Services failed to investigate the deaths of 133 Mainers in the care of community-based providers. These auditors also discovered that nine of these deaths were unexplained, suspicious, or untimely, but not enough information about the other deaths to determine the category they fit into.
Gov. Paul LePage and then-DHHS Commissioner Mary Mayhew have stated time and time again that they look out for Maine's most vulnerable residents. Obviously, this is not true. As we all know, they always pass the buck, which in this case they passed to former Govs. John Baldacci and Angus King. But Mayhew was the DHHS commissioner and LePage was her boss during this period of time, so they are totally responsible for everything in the August audit.
Our Legislature should require an official investigation of all 133 deaths because someone needs to look out for Maine's most vulnerable residents. No one in the LePage administration has done anything except make excuses and cut funding, and these people and their families deserve answers to their questions.
David H. Crockett
Augusta
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: DEATH & DYING (91%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); WEATHER (89%); HURRICANE IRMA (79%); SHOOTINGS (79%); DOGS (78%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (77%); BUSINESS NEWS (77%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (72%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (67%); OCEAN ECONOMY (65%); GUN CONTROL (63%); SCHOOL VIOLENCE (63%); COASTAL AREAS (60%); CONSERVATION (60%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (60%); AGREEMENTS (50%)

Industry: AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (60%)

Person: SCOTT PRUITT (58%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: September 21, 2017


End of Document


Broad environmental efforts await Maine lawmakers;
Bills sponsored this session address electronics waste, mercury in equipment and climate change.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
February 2, 2003 Sunday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAINE & NEW ENGLAND; Pg. 1B
Length: 1712 words
Byline: MEREDITH GOAD Staff Writer
Series: LEGISLATIVE SPOTLIGHT EDITOR'S NOTE First in a three-part series on critical issues before the Maine Legislature.  TODAY: A look at key environmental bills, including plans for developing a comprehensive energy policy for Maine.  FEB. 9: Health care tops the legislative agenda since Gov. John Baldacci has made reform a priority.  FEB. 16: From boating to hunting, lawmakers tackle rules on Maine's most valuable resource: the outdoors.
Body


Ever wonder what happens to old computers when they die?
Chances are they end up in a landfill, or worse, on a container ship bound for a developing country, where they are dismantled. Anywhere they land, they are an environmental hazard: The average computer is chock-full of toxic materials, including mercury, cadmium, brominated flame retardant and several pounds of lead.
This winter state lawmakers will consider an electronics waste bill that would require computer manufacturers to take responsibility for the safe disposal of their products. It's one of dozens of environmental bills that the Maine Legislature will debate during this legislative session.
Other environmental measures will tackle the sweeping topics of climate change and energy conservation, both part of a larger effort to develop a comprehensive energy plan for Maine. Some bills will revisit controversial issues left unresolved last year, such as the cut-and-run forestry practice known as liquidation harvesting. And a five-year battle over how to protect small streams from the impact of timber harvesting may finally come to an end.
There will be several more bills dealing with the Allagash Wilderness Waterway, and several that aim to expand the state's effort to fight mercury pollution. Arsenic contamination in drinking water and on the playground will also be a target.
The electronics waste bill, sponsored by Rep. Judd Thompson, D-China, will attempt to deal with a problem that is growing with every upgrade.
"The National Academy of Sciences estimates that within a few years there will be 500 million obsolete computers in the United States alone," said Pete Didisheim, advocacy director at the Natural Resources Council of Maine.
Many people and businesses believe that taking their old equipment to a computer recycler solves the toxics problem, but Didisheim said that 80 percent of the computers that are recycled end up on container ships and are taken to China, India and Pakistan. There they are dismantled "in horrific conditions," he said, with some components being recycled while other parts - even those that are toxic - are burned or boiled.
Sending the problem overseas is "not the right thing to do," said Michael Belliveau, executive director of the Environmental Health Strategy Center.
"We need legislation for keeping this stuff out of Maine's landfills and out of the incinerators, but also to make sure it goes to proper recycling," he said. "Ideally, the manufacturer ought to take responsibility for the toxic impacts of their products at the end of their life."
Energy efficiency
Other bills that are likely to get a lot of attention address energy efficiency standards and the problem of climate change. They are part of an effort to develop an energy plan for Maine, and many of their provisions are based on a report published last year by the Maine Center for Economic Policy, the Natural Resources Council of Maine and the Mainewatch Institute.
Senate Majority Leader Sharon Treat, D-Farmingdale, is sponsoring an omnibus energy bill that she said would save both energy and money at a time when the country is thinking about war, oil prices are rising, and there is widespread economic uncertainty.
"I can't stress enough how energy costs are one of the single biggest drivers of business costs here in the state of Maine, and it's an area where our costs are significantly higher than other areas of the country," Treat said. "Anything we can do that reduces those costs is certainly worth looking at."
The energy bill would increase funding for energy efficiency programs by establishing a statewide system benefit charge. It would also establish new appliance standards for 10 products that are not covered by federal standards.
Those products are ceiling fans and ceiling fan light kits; commercial clothes washers; commercial refrigerators and freezers; illuminated exit signs; large packaged air conditioning equipment; low-voltage, dry-type distribution transformers; set-top boxes for cable TV; torchiere lighting fixtures; traffic signal modules; and unit heaters.
According to a report done by Maine's public advocate, the state could save more than $500 million in energy costs through 2020 by improving and increasing its energy efficiency programs.
"One thing about these energy efficiency standards is there may be an up-front cost, but frequently over a couple of years you actually save significant amounts of money," Treat said.
"Part of the difficulty is that we have a state government that operates on a two-year budget cycle, so we can't always look ahead the way we want to. This legislation is about encouraging the state to look a little farther down the road."
Treat's bill would also encourage energy-efficient building construction and increase renewable energy by rewriting the state's renewable portfolio standard.
A renewable portfolio standard is a legal requirement that any electricity sold in the state must include a certain amount of renewable energy. Maine has a high standard - 30 percent - but it allows the burning of tires and coal-fired cogeneration to be counted as renewable energy.
"We think there's a big problem with that," said Sue Jones of the Natural Resources Council of Maine, who helped draft the bill. "We would like to see the definitions (of renewable energy) change. We would also like to see the percentage be meaningful. It should drive new renewables development in the state of Maine."
Climate change
Another proposal would tackle energy issues from a different angle, addressing the threat of climate change.
Last week, Maine announced that it intends to join Massachusetts and Connecticut in a lawsuit against the Bush administration for its refusal to regulate carbon dioxide, a major cause of global warming, as a pollutant. Yet Maine itself is lagging far behind other states in its own efforts to deal with climate change. Maine is the only New England state, for example, that has not yet developed a climate change action plan.
That would change under a bill that's being sponsored by Rep. Theodore Koffman, D-Bar Harbor, chair of the natural resources committee. Koffman has a big interest in climate change policy. He served on the state's climate change task force a few years ago and is a part of a small nonprofit group called Maine Global Climate Change Inc.
"Climate change continues to be, I think, one of the most significant threats to Maine and to the country," Koffman said, "and it's only going to get tougher."
Changes in weather patterns, the northward migration of insect pests, the potential transformation of Maine's forests, and sea-level rise that contributes to erosion and loss in real estate values could all have tremendous impacts on Maine's economy, Koffman said.
Given the current state of the economy, it's probably more practical to take an incremental approach to addressing these threats, he said, "but we can't back away from these issues."
Koffman's bill would require Maine to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2010. These reductions would be achieved by following a short-term plan that would be developed by the end of the year. Emissions would be tracked through a mandatory registry.
The state would also be required to create by 2006 a long-term climate action plan consistent with the goals established by the New England governors and eastern Canadian premiers. Those goals envision greenhouse gas emissions that, by 2020, are at least 10 percent less than 1990 levels.
Maine's state government would be required to create its own emissions inventory and to develop a plan to reduce emissions to 1990 levels by 2010.
Another part of the bill would require all major development projects to calculate their greenhouse gas emissions during the permitting process.
"The idea would be down the road to have some sense of accountability and accounting of greenhouse gases in the future," said Jones of the Natural Resources Council. "If a new turnpike is put in, a shopping mall, those increases in greenhouse gases need to be counted."
Koffman said he hopes the debate over his bill will help to educate people about the threat of climate change and convince them to take the issue more seriously.
"At this point, we're not feeling the pain," Koffman said. "Mercury was a similar kind of issue. While the scientific community understood the toxicity of mercury and what it would do to humans, it's invisible. And it wasn't until the fish advisories came out in Maine, about pregnant women and children eating freshwater fish that had accumulated mercury, that the public began to pay some real attention."
Mercury pollution is going to be back in the public eye this session with several new bills, some of which build upon previous legislation that phased out the sale of some mercury-containing products in the state.
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection has submitted a new report to the Legislature with proposed legislation attached that would prohibit the sale of mercury-containing switches, measuring devices and relays. Measuring devices that contain mercury include products such as barometers and blood pressure cuffs.
"We did quite a lot of homework on what the marketplace can provide in terms of non-mercury alternatives and whether there would be particular hardships posed by these kind of prohibitions," said David Lennett, director of the DEP's Bureau of Remediation and Waste Management. "We also circulated a draft report on our strategy widely within Maine and outside of Maine for comment, so this issue I think has been significantly vetted before it goes to the Legislature."
A law passed last year that requires the removal of mercury switches from old cars before they are scrapped has come under fire from automakers, who are now suing the state over the issue. Automakers are required to pay for the program, which began Jan. 1.
Automakers are also considering submitting their own bill to the Legislature that would make changes to the program. If such a bill is submitted, the DEP "intends to oppose that rather vigorously," Lennett said.
"We think the automakers should be responsible in large part for the problem they created," he said.
Staff Writer Meredith Goad can be contacted at 791-6332 or at:
mgoad@pressherald.com  
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (92%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (91%); ELECTRONIC WASTE (90%); HEAVY METALS & TOXIC MINERALS (90%); LANDFILLS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (89%); NATURAL RESOURCES (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (88%); GREEN IT (78%); MATERIALS RECOVERY & RECYCLING (78%); RECYCLING INDUSTRY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CONSERVATION (77%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (77%); FIRE SAFE MATERIALS & PRODUCTS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); WATER POLLUTION (77%); WATER RESOURCES (77%); FIRE PREVENTION & SAFETY (76%); ECONOMIC NEWS (72%); WILDERNESS (69%); EXECUTIVES (63%)

Company: NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES   (54%);  NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES  (54%)

Organization: NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES   (54%);  NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES  (54%)

Industry: TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (91%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); ELECTRONIC WASTE (90%); HEAVY METALS & TOXIC MINERALS (90%); LANDFILLS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (89%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (89%); MANUFACTURING (89%); MARINE VESSELS (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (88%); GREEN IT (78%); MATERIALS RECOVERY & RECYCLING (78%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (78%); RECYCLING INDUSTRY (78%); COMPUTER MAKERS (73%); FORESTRY & LOGGING (73%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (73%); CANALS & WATERWAYS (72%)

Geographic: PORTLAND, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (93%); NORTHEAST USA (79%); CHINA (92%); INDIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: February 3, 2003


End of Document


How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 23, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 769 words
Byline: Abigail Curtis BDN Staff
Body


On a spring day so cold the sap froze in the few old-fashioned buckets that Mark Cooper of Coopers Maple Products still uses, the Windham maple producer talked about the changes he has noticed over the 31 years he's been in business.
The season used to start in late February and run through early April.
"It was pretty consistent," he said.
Not anymore. These days, it's not uncommon for him to make maple syrup in January or to have balmy 65 degree February days followed by huge snow storms and frigid temperatures in March. He's noticing his maple trees have struggled some, with fungal diseases or branches on otherwise healthy trees that drop to the ground for no reason he can ascertain. Red maples are moving in and sugar maples are losing ground, he's noticed. Big wind and snow storms also have taken a toll on the trees. And even when the sap is running, there's just not as big a flow as there used to be.
"We certainly have seen a change, and not for the better," Cooper said.
Climate change is going to exert a toll on the golden maple syrup we love to pour over pancakes, ice cream and French toast. In fact, it already is, experts said Thursday at a media event organized by the Natural Resources Council of Maine and held at Cooper's farm. Climate change won't be the end of maple syrup here, they said, but it will tax producers, likely putting some smaller ones out of business. Warmer temperatures and drier conditions are changing the makeup of our forests, which are predicted to have 40 percent fewer maple trees by the end of the 21st century.
"It's going to be harder and harder for Mainers to produce maple syrup," said Andy Whitman, a forest scientist and the director of sustainable economies at Manomet, a Brunswick-based conservation nonprofit organization. "With fewer trees, a shorter tapping season and trees producing less syrup. ... It does mean a real change in Maine."
The Maine maple industry has been growing in economic importance to the state, with more than 700,000 gallons of maple syrup made here last year. It contributes nearly $30 million to the Maine economy annually and makes Maine the country's third most important maple syrup producing state, after Vermont and New York. But the industry is being stressed by the effects of a changing climate.
Whitman said the tapping season in Maine starts about eight days earlier and ends 11 days earlier than it did 50 years ago, making a season that is 10 percent shorter. He also said scientists are predicting a steep decline in maples over the next decade. A University of Maine study has found that the composition of Maine forests is changing, with warming temperatures leading to more beech trees and fewer maple trees.
"The maple sugar industry is an iconic industry for our state," he said. "There's going to be steep challenges. The smallest producers who use old technology will probably go out of business."
Officials from the Natural Resources Council of Maine called for climate action at all levels, from local to state to federal and beyond. More initiatives, research and programs are needed to try to mitigate challenges posed by climate change, they said.
"Sweeping climate change under the rug won't change anything," Kristin Jackson, the NRCM federal outreach coordinator, said.
Cooper has already made a couple of major technological shifts during his decades as a maple producer. He started with buckets, then moved to a gravity tubing system, then most recently to a vacuum pump-operated system. That system lets him collect sap even when the conditions are less than ideal, and makes his trees more productive. That's a help, he said, but can only do so much.
"Our biggest challenge is getting decent weather to produce enough sap flow," Cooper said. "We've had below average production over the last seven years, compared to the previous 20 years. Those wide swings of temperatures are something we didn't use to deal with."
Still, despite everything, he loves making syrup and is looking forward to the crowds and festivities of Maine Maple Sunday, which will mark its 35th year on Sunday, March 25. The people who come to his farm will enjoy a big breakfast, complete with maple syrup, of course. They'll have the chance to meet some of his farm animals and will smell the fragrant aroma of simmering maple sap. And maybe they'll come away with an understanding of how weather and climate changes can affect his industry.
"I am worried a little bit," Cooper said. "There are challenges. But I know we'll be making syrup as long as we want to."
Follow the Bangor Daily News on Facebook for the latest Maine news.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%); CONSERVATION (74%); NATURAL RESOURCES (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (69%); RESEARCH REPORTS (68%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

Organization: NATURAL RESOURCES COUNCIL OF MAINE (54%)

Industry: MAPLE SUGAR FARMING (91%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

Load-Date: March 23, 2018


End of Document


How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 23, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 769 words
Byline: Abigail Curtis BDN Staff
Body


On a spring day so cold the sap froze in the few old-fashioned buckets that Mark Cooper of Coopers Maple Products still uses, the Windham maple producer talked about the changes he has noticed over the 31 years he's been in business.
The season used to start in late February and run through early April.
"It was pretty consistent," he said.
Not anymore. These days, it's not uncommon for him to make maple syrup in January or to have balmy 65 degree February days followed by huge snow storms and frigid temperatures in March. He's noticing his maple trees have struggled some, with fungal diseases or branches on otherwise healthy trees that drop to the ground for no reason he can ascertain. Red maples are moving in and sugar maples are losing ground, he's noticed. Big wind and snow storms also have taken a toll on the trees. And even when the sap is running, there's just not as big a flow as there used to be.
"We certainly have seen a change, and not for the better," Cooper said.
Climate change is going to exert a toll on the golden maple syrup we love to pour over pancakes, ice cream and French toast. In fact, it already is, experts said Thursday at a media event organized by the Natural Resources Council of Maine and held at Cooper's farm. Climate change won't be the end of maple syrup here, they said, but it will tax producers, likely putting some smaller ones out of business. Warmer temperatures and drier conditions are changing the makeup of our forests, which are predicted to have 40 percent fewer maple trees by the end of the 21st century.
"It's going to be harder and harder for Mainers to produce maple syrup," said Andy Whitman, a forest scientist and the director of sustainable economies at Manomet, a Brunswick-based conservation nonprofit organization. "With fewer trees, a shorter tapping season and trees producing less syrup. ... It does mean a real change in Maine."
The Maine maple industry has been growing in economic importance to the state, with more than 700,000 gallons of maple syrup made here last year. It contributes nearly $30 million to the Maine economy annually and makes Maine the country's third most important maple syrup producing state, after Vermont and New York. But the industry is being stressed by the effects of a changing climate.
Whitman said the tapping season in Maine starts about eight days earlier and ends 11 days earlier than it did 50 years ago, making a season that is 10 percent shorter. He also said scientists are predicting a steep decline in maples over the next decade. A University of Maine study has found that the composition of Maine forests is changing, with warming temperatures leading to more beech trees and fewer maple trees.
"The maple sugar industry is an iconic industry for our state," he said. "There's going to be steep challenges. The smallest producers who use old technology will probably go out of business."
Officials from the Natural Resources Council of Maine called for climate action at all levels, from local to state to federal and beyond. More initiatives, research and programs are needed to try to mitigate challenges posed by climate change, they said.
"Sweeping climate change under the rug won't change anything," Kristin Jackson, the NRCM federal outreach coordinator, said.
Cooper has already made a couple of major technological shifts during his decades as a maple producer. He started with buckets, then moved to a gravity tubing system, then most recently to a vacuum pump-operated system. That system lets him collect sap even when the conditions are less than ideal, and makes his trees more productive. That's a help, he said, but can only do so much.
"Our biggest challenge is getting decent weather to produce enough sap flow," Cooper said. "We've had below average production over the last seven years, compared to the previous 20 years. Those wide swings of temperatures are something we didn't use to deal with."
Still, despite everything, he loves making syrup and is looking forward to the crowds and festivities of Maine Maple Sunday, which will mark its 35th year on Sunday, March 25. The people who come to his farm will enjoy a big breakfast, complete with maple syrup, of course. They'll have the chance to meet some of his farm animals and will smell the fragrant aroma of simmering maple sap. And maybe they'll come away with an understanding of how weather and climate changes can affect his industry.
"I am worried a little bit," Cooper said. "There are challenges. But I know we'll be making syrup as long as we want to."
Follow the Bangor Daily News on Facebook for the latest Maine news.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%); CONSERVATION (74%); NATURAL RESOURCES (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (69%); RESEARCH REPORTS (68%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

Organization: NATURAL RESOURCES COUNCIL OF MAINE (54%)

Industry: MAPLE SUGAR FARMING (91%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

Load-Date: March 25, 2018


End of Document


How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 23, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 769 words
Byline: Abigail Curtis BDN Staff
Body


On a spring day so cold the sap froze in the few old-fashioned buckets that Mark Cooper of Coopers Maple Products still uses, the Windham maple producer talked about the changes he has noticed over the 31 years he's been in business.
The season used to start in late February and run through early April.
"It was pretty consistent," he said.
Not anymore. These days, it's not uncommon for him to make maple syrup in January or to have balmy 65 degree February days followed by huge snow storms and frigid temperatures in March. He's noticing his maple trees have struggled some, with fungal diseases or branches on otherwise healthy trees that drop to the ground for no reason he can ascertain. Red maples are moving in and sugar maples are losing ground, he's noticed. Big wind and snow storms also have taken a toll on the trees. And even when the sap is running, there's just not as big a flow as there used to be.
"We certainly have seen a change, and not for the better," Cooper said.
Climate change is going to exert a toll on the golden maple syrup we love to pour over pancakes, ice cream and French toast. In fact, it already is, experts said Thursday at a media event organized by the Natural Resources Council of Maine and held at Cooper's farm. Climate change won't be the end of maple syrup here, they said, but it will tax producers, likely putting some smaller ones out of business. Warmer temperatures and drier conditions are changing the makeup of our forests, which are predicted to have 40 percent fewer maple trees by the end of the 21st century.
"It's going to be harder and harder for Mainers to produce maple syrup," said Andy Whitman, a forest scientist and the director of sustainable economies at Manomet, a Brunswick-based conservation nonprofit organization. "With fewer trees, a shorter tapping season and trees producing less syrup. ... It does mean a real change in Maine."
The Maine maple industry has been growing in economic importance to the state, with more than 700,000 gallons of maple syrup made here last year. It contributes nearly $30 million to the Maine economy annually and makes Maine the country's third most important maple syrup producing state, after Vermont and New York. But the industry is being stressed by the effects of a changing climate.
Whitman said the tapping season in Maine starts about eight days earlier and ends 11 days earlier than it did 50 years ago, making a season that is 10 percent shorter. He also said scientists are predicting a steep decline in maples over the next decade. A University of Maine study has found that the composition of Maine forests is changing, with warming temperatures leading to more beech trees and fewer maple trees.
"The maple sugar industry is an iconic industry for our state," he said. "There's going to be steep challenges. The smallest producers who use old technology will probably go out of business."
Officials from the Natural Resources Council of Maine called for climate action at all levels, from local to state to federal and beyond. More initiatives, research and programs are needed to try to mitigate challenges posed by climate change, they said.
"Sweeping climate change under the rug won't change anything," Kristin Jackson, the NRCM federal outreach coordinator, said.
Cooper has already made a couple of major technological shifts during his decades as a maple producer. He started with buckets, then moved to a gravity tubing system, then most recently to a vacuum pump-operated system. That system lets him collect sap even when the conditions are less than ideal, and makes his trees more productive. That's a help, he said, but can only do so much.
"Our biggest challenge is getting decent weather to produce enough sap flow," Cooper said. "We've had below average production over the last seven years, compared to the previous 20 years. Those wide swings of temperatures are something we didn't use to deal with."
Still, despite everything, he loves making syrup and is looking forward to the crowds and festivities of Maine Maple Sunday, which will mark its 35th year on Sunday, March 25. The people who come to his farm will enjoy a big breakfast, complete with maple syrup, of course. They'll have the chance to meet some of his farm animals and will smell the fragrant aroma of simmering maple sap. And maybe they'll come away with an understanding of how weather and climate changes can affect his industry.
"I am worried a little bit," Cooper said. "There are challenges. But I know we'll be making syrup as long as we want to."
Follow the Bangor Daily News on Facebook for the latest Maine news.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (78%); EXTREME TEMPERATURES (78%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%); CONSERVATION (74%); NATURAL RESOURCES (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); SEVERE WINTER WEATHER (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (69%); RESEARCH REPORTS (68%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

Organization: NATURAL RESOURCES COUNCIL OF MAINE (54%)

Industry: MAPLE SUGAR FARMING (91%); GREEN ECONOMY (78%); SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (78%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

Load-Date: March 24, 2018


End of Document


Thursday, Dec. 21, 2017: Crack down on drug dealers, adopt a flat tax, climate change threatens business
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
December 20, 2017 Wednesday


Copyright 2017 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1045 words
Body


Adopt a flat tax
For crying out loud, why can't Congress simplify and overhaul the tax code to a basic flat tax? That way everybody pays in to support the many worthwhile expenditures of a democracy.
Let's say 6.5 percent, period. I am pulling this out of thin air, but it's a start. And say businesses pay 10 percent. Then, you adjust expenditures to live within your means.
Simple, huh? Start there.
David Corriveau
Caribou
Collins showed her true colors
While many of us breathed a deep sigh of relief late on Dec. 12 after the defeat of Roy Moore's senatorial ambitions in Alabama's election, the stain on the GOP will not go away quite so easily. And it is not only in Alabama where the Republicans have abandoned their values in order to get a quick legislative win.
Even in our own state, Sen. Susan Collins has shown her true colors this week in choosing to vote for a GOP tax bill, which many call a "tax scam," that undermines and endangers her own constituents. There are very few economists who believe this tax bill is a good idea, and many have written about how grossly it will impact the middle class and the working poor across the nation.
Yet, Collins continues to play footsie with the bill, coyly accepting empty promises from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, all the way ignoring the will -- and the pleas -- of her constituents, from retirees to students, nurses to clergy, some of whom were arrested last week.
Shame on her, and shame on the GOP.
Nico Jenkins
Blue Hill
Dire tax predictions
I am retired and have the time to watch and read a wide variety of daily news reports on the tax bill. I would like to offer the American people some facts, food for thought, and a few predictions.
If you make less than $75,000 per year, you are getting a tax increase over the life of this bill. The vast majority of Americans fall into this category. If you make between $30,000 and $50,000, your tax increase begins as early as 2020. The corporate tax rate is cut permanently from 35 percent to 21 percent. The "pass-through" rate for businesses is cut to 20 percent. The top 1 percent of earners get more than 50 percent of the tax cut. Everyone who has health insurance will see premium increases. Millions more will lose their insurance completely.
In recent weeks, there were news reports, carried in the Bangor and Portland newspapers, that in the next 12 years as many as 70 million jobs across the U.S. will be lost to automation. With the passage of this tax bill, corporations will have incentives to accelerate the installation of robots and put people out of work. They can write off the cost of installing the robots. They no longer will have the overhead of labor costs -- no more wage, insurance, or pension costs. Their increased windfall profits will be taxed at only 21 percent. No one is talking about this, but it is coming soon.
Paul Cyr
Madawaska
Crackdown on drug dealers
In a recent edition of the paper, there was a story about a Dresden man who was sentenced to 10 month in prison for selling heroin and crack cocaine over a two-year period. The maximum sentence for this is 20 years and $1 million fine. Until we start handing down serious sentences for this type of crime, the war on drugs in this state is a big farce.
Fred Carey
St. George
Climate change threatens business
I was delighted by the BDN's presentation of an article about international climate scientists awarded grants to continue their climate research in France. I especially appreciated that the BDN set this article, about French President Emmanuel Macron's support for climate research, in the Business section. Business is exactly where climate change risks, climate research and climate mitigation belong. Business success requires a stable environmental climate as much as it needs a stable economic climate. Moreover, successful businesses never ignore risks: the most successful enterprises pay experts to help with risk management.
Also, America's history of funding scientific research has demonstrated that well-supported researchers, shielded from administrative meddling and surrounded by diverse colleagues, produce results that benefit humanity and spur economic development.
Ironically, the Wall Street Journal didn't mention these grant winners. Instead, WSJ editors wrote an editorial about Macron's rise in the polls. They attributed his growing popularity to his free-market outlook and his desire to rollback regulations -- particularly labor laws. Predictably, WSJ editors abhor labor regulations as restricting market operation.
With hypocrisy, they can't acknowledge that unregulated carbon emissions endanger other businesses and humans, and climate change is the free-market's greatest failure. Sadly, they reject non-regulatory, free-market solutions to climate change, which would be so easy to implement and would manage our climate risks so well.
Judy Weiss
Brookline, Massachusetts
Collins put party before constituents
Supporters of the GOP tax scam, like Sen. Susan Collins, would have you believe that it simplifies the tax code. It doesn't. It adds hundreds of pages of new regulations to help billionaires and corporations.
There are new special regulations to help "pass-through" professional corporations, and others to help so-called C corporations, and help for owners of private jets and for-profit "universities." They also cut all sorts of deductions that many people use. The lion's share of these tax cuts -- which are projected to explode the deficit -- will go to billionaires and corporations. (In case you hadn't heard, many corporations -- who employ armies of tax accountants and lawyers -- already pay low taxes.)
I don't mind paying my fair share of taxes, but it bothers me that most middle-class people like myself have not gotten a significant raise in more than 30 years. All the gains from our economy have gone to the wealthy. Why do Republicans only care about wealthy donors and corporations? It just makes me wonder why anyone who isn't a millionaire would ever vote for a Republican.
I always thought Collins was a moderate, but now it's obvious she is putting a win for her party before the interests of her constituents. Our children and grandchildren will be paying for these increases to the deficit.
Samuel Winch
Lubec
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TAXES & TAXATION (97%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); TAX LAW (91%); TAX REFORM (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TAX RELIEF (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); TAX FRAUD (73%); ARRESTS (72%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (70%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (70%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (70%); RETIREMENT & RETIREES (69%); CORPORATE TAX (50%); RELIGION (50%)

Company:  PORTLAND NEWSPAPERS (51%)

Industry: HEALTH INSURANCE (77%); INSURANCE PREMIUMS (64%)

Person: SUSAN COLLINS (78%); MITCH MCCONNELL (58%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); PORTLAND, ME, USA (74%); ALABAMA, USA (92%); MAINE, USA (91%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: December 20, 2017


End of Document


Monday, March 18, 2019: Inevitable climate consequences, Collins' judicial votes matter, Local effects of climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 16, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Bangor Daily News
Length: 525 words
Body


Inevitable climate consequences
Of course, the people who bear the greatest responsibility for global warming will be dead before the worst of it hits earth. But global warming will present earth with the gravest catastrophe since the meteor hit water off the Yucatan Peninsula. Today's willfully ignorant champions of blind corporate capitalism will not be here for the end game, but their children and grandchildren will die miserably. No amount of money in the market or the bank will protect them from the inevitable consequences of deliberate ignorance and superstition.
William Leavenworth
Searsmont
Collins' judicial votes matter
As a sponsor of the Equality Act of 2019, Sen. Susan Collins claims to have worked against LGBT discrimination throughout her career in the Senate. Beyond this cheap attempt at her continuing campaign for redemption, the important nuance here are her recent judicial votes.
Collins confirmed Judge Allison Jones Rushing, who has a history of arguing against marriage equality, to a lifetime appointment on the Fourth Circuit. She also voted for Eric Murphy of Ohio as U.S. Circuit Judge for the Sixth Circuit. He defended in court Ohio's ban on same-sex marriage, which despite his efforts, led the Supreme Court to rule in favor of marriage equality nationwide in 2015.
Lastly, although she didn't vote for Chad Readler for the Sixth Circuit, who argued gay workers aren't protected under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which bars sex discrimination in employment, she did vote to invoke cloture on his confirmation.
These judicial votes matter. Collins claims to fight against discrimination, but her votes in the judiciary is yet another example of how little concern the senator has for the safety and security of the LGBT community.
Terry Dubois
Milford
Local effects of climate change
Do you remember when Maine hunters and fishermen had never seen a tick unless they traveled south? No one in Maine had ever been sickened by a tick-borne illness? There was a Maine shrimp fishery? Clams were abundant and green crabs were only a nuisance? The ash supply for Native American basketmakers was not threatened? All New England coastal states had a lobster fishery? One hundred-year storms were really rare?
If so, you have already seen and experienced some of the local effects of climate change. It's here, happening now and the future doesn't look good unless Congress acts quickly and decisively to reduce the causes of climate change.
A bill that would do that, The Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend Act, HR 763, has been introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives with bipartisan support. This bill is effective, good for people, good for the economy, bipartisan, and revenue neutral.
Please educate yourself about this bill then contact your representatives. Thank Chellie Pingree, she's already a sponsor. If Jared Golden is your representative, ask him to support the bill by signing on as a sponsor. Then contact Sens. Susan Collins and Angus King and ask them to sponsor a companion bill in the Senate.
We need to do this for our children and grandchildren. Please take action.
William Lee
Waterville
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); JUDGES (90%); LGBTQ+ PERSONS (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CRUSTACEANS (85%); SHELLFISH FISHING (85%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (75%); US CONGRESS (74%); BITES & STINGS (73%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (73%); COASTAL AREAS (72%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (72%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (71%); MARRIAGE LAW (68%); NATIVE AMERICANS (67%); TICK BORNE DISEASES (61%); GRANDCHILDREN (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); SHELLFISH FISHING (85%)

Person: JARED GOLDEN (79%); SUSAN COLLINS (79%); CHELLIE PINGREE (58%); ABBY FINKENAUER (51%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (94%); EARTH (79%); NORTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: March 18, 2019


End of Document


Monday, March 18, 2019: Inevitable climate consequences, Collins' judicial votes matter, Local effects of climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 16, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Bangor Daily News
Length: 525 words
Body


Inevitable climate consequences
Of course, the people who bear the greatest responsibility for global warming will be dead before the worst of it hits earth. But global warming will present earth with the gravest catastrophe since the meteor hit water off the Yucatan Peninsula. Today's willfully ignorant champions of blind corporate capitalism will not be here for the end game, but their children and grandchildren will die miserably. No amount of money in the market or the bank will protect them from the inevitable consequences of deliberate ignorance and superstition.
William Leavenworth
Searsmont
Collins' judicial votes matter
As a sponsor of the Equality Act of 2019, Sen. Susan Collins claims to have worked against LGBT discrimination throughout her career in the Senate. Beyond this cheap attempt at her continuing campaign for redemption, the important nuance here are her recent judicial votes.
Collins confirmed Judge Allison Jones Rushing, who has a history of arguing against marriage equality, to a lifetime appointment on the Fourth Circuit. She also voted for Eric Murphy of Ohio as U.S. Circuit Judge for the Sixth Circuit. He defended in court Ohio's ban on same-sex marriage, which despite his efforts, led the Supreme Court to rule in favor of marriage equality nationwide in 2015.
Lastly, although she didn't vote for Chad Readler for the Sixth Circuit, who argued gay workers aren't protected under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which bars sex discrimination in employment, she did vote to invoke cloture on his confirmation.
These judicial votes matter. Collins claims to fight against discrimination, but her votes in the judiciary is yet another example of how little concern the senator has for the safety and security of the LGBT community.
Terry Dubois
Milford
Local effects of climate change
Do you remember when Maine hunters and fishermen had never seen a tick unless they traveled south? No one in Maine had ever been sickened by a tick-borne illness? There was a Maine shrimp fishery? Clams were abundant and green crabs were only a nuisance? The ash supply for Native American basketmakers was not threatened? All New England coastal states had a lobster fishery? One hundred-year storms were really rare?
If so, you have already seen and experienced some of the local effects of climate change. It's here, happening now and the future doesn't look good unless Congress acts quickly and decisively to reduce the causes of climate change.
A bill that would do that, The Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend Act, HR 763, has been introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives with bipartisan support. This bill is effective, good for people, good for the economy, bipartisan, and revenue neutral.
Please educate yourself about this bill then contact your representatives. Thank Chellie Pingree, she's already a sponsor. If Jared Golden is your representative, ask him to support the bill by signing on as a sponsor. Then contact Sens. Susan Collins and Angus King and ask them to sponsor a companion bill in the Senate.
We need to do this for our children and grandchildren. Please take action.
William Lee
Waterville
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); JUDGES (90%); LGBTQ+ PERSONS (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CRUSTACEANS (85%); SHELLFISH FISHING (85%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (75%); US CONGRESS (74%); BITES & STINGS (73%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (73%); COASTAL AREAS (72%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (72%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (71%); MARRIAGE LAW (68%); NATIVE AMERICANS (67%); TICK BORNE DISEASES (61%); GRANDCHILDREN (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); SHELLFISH FISHING (85%)

Person: JARED GOLDEN (79%); SUSAN COLLINS (79%); CHELLIE PINGREE (58%); ABBY FINKENAUER (51%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); MAINE, USA (94%); EARTH (79%); NORTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: March 16, 2019


End of Document


Snow in April is no disproof of climate change; The biggest enemy we face isn't climate change, but denial.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
April 16, 2007 Monday
HOLIDAY Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6; OUR VIEWS
Length: 243 words
Body


What does our unseasonably cold April say about climate change?
Roughly the same thing our unseasonably warm January did.
There's a widespread misconception that the phenomenon of ''global warming'' implies a shift toward steadily warmer weather in all seasons. This is absolutely not the case
One of hallmarks of climate change is the increasing frequency of extreme events on both sides of the equation.
So while ''global warming'' may be broadly accurate as description of the complex future toward which scientists believe the world's climate is heading, it's an overly simplistic frame. And in the face of abnormally cold weather, it gives ammunition to those who are predisposed to disbelieve or downplay the warnings being offered by a large majority of the world's climate scientists.
Even ''climate change'' doesn't quite get there, as we tend to think of change as an incremental, even controllable mechanism. Perhaps ''climate dislocation'' would be better...
That's the take-home message from the latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. All of our cities, our infrastructure, our mental frames are based on the assumption that the future will look much like the past. It won't.
There was a silver lining to this gloomy climate change report: The end result, a chaotic and warmer world, is not predetermined. Actions we take now will matter greatly in 50 years. But in order to change our destiny, we'll have to get beyond denial.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (70%)

Organization:  INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (54%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%)

Geographic: PORTLAND, ME, USA (90%); EARTH (92%)

Load-Date: April 16, 2007


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE PUTS HEAT ON REGION;
Officials hope that the findings in a new report will make global warming relevant to the public.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 30, 2001 Thursday, Final Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 810 words
Byline: From staff reports
Body


Temperatures in New England could rise 6 to 10 degrees during the next century because of global climate change, profoundly changing the region's life and landscape, according to a new report.
"We wouldn't have skiing, we wouldn't have our maples, you wouldn't have your white pines," said Barrett Rock, a forestry professor at the University of New Hampshire. "We would just be a very different place than what we're used to."
The report, "Preparing for a Changing Climate," will be released Sept. 11. It is one of 16 regional reports ordered by the U.S. Global Change Research Program that are part of a national assessment of the potential repercussions of climate change.
The New England report is the seventh regional assessment to be completed, following reports from areas of the country such as the Midwest, the Southeast and Alaska. Representatives of every New England state, mostly scientists, participated in the project. It is the culmination of a four-year effort to try to make climate change issues relevant to the average New Englander.
"This has been written in English rather than science-ese," said Rock, who gave an overview of the report's contents during a meeting Wednesday with the Press Herald's editorial board. "We have tried our best to select topics that would be of concern to New Englanders."
For example, the average New Englander - well-versed in shifts in the weather - might not think that a shift of 6 to 10 degrees is a big deal, Rock said. So the report explains the warming in a different way: Add 6 degrees to the 30-year average temperature in Boston, and suddenly that city has the climate of Richmond, Va. Add 10 degrees, and Boston becomes Atlanta.
When talking in time frames of decades and centuries, it is difficult to predict exactly what will happen when. But already there are some hints of what might be in store for Maine and the rest of New England if climate change continues.
New England has warmed seven-tenths of a degree since 1895, slightly less than the nationwide increase of 1 degree. It doesn't sound like much, but even this slight warming is already having an impact on everything from the economic health of Maine's ski industry to human health problems caused by ozone pollution.
The number of extreme weather events in New England is on the increase and seems to be accelerating, Rock said. Ice-out dates on the lakes are coming earlier and earlier, with the biggest change at Maine's Moosehead Lake, where ice-out comes six days earlier than it did 100 years ago.
"The winter ice-on is arriving later in the fall as well," he said, "and so the overall ice-on period has been reduced for Moosehead Lake by about 14 days in the last 100 years."
The maple sugar industry, centered in northern Maryland and Pennsylvania in the early 1900s, has gradually moved north over the last century. In the 1950s, some 80 percent of the world's maple syrup was produced in New England. Today, 80 percent of the world's maple syrup comes from Canada.
"It's because sugar maple is so keyed to just the right temperature variables," Rock said. "It's got to be cold at night - it's got to be below freezing - and then during the day it's got to get about 6 degrees above freezing for the sap to flow. I think most people look at this past winter as a more typical New England winter, but in fact this was the worst sugar season on record."
Despite the scientific evidence, not everyone in the public is convinced that global climate change is a reality. It's a complex topic, and local variations in climate sometimes muddy the public perception of what's happening.
A review of global warming science by the National Academy of Sciences, ordered by President Bush, concluded earlier this year that Earth is indeed warming. Scientists are still unsure, however, how much of the warming is natural and how much has been caused by human activities.
The New England regional assessment was used in the preparation of the climate change action plan released this week by the New England Governors' Conference. That plan calls for a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the region to 1990 levels by 2010, and a long-term reduction that would cut emissions to a level that's 75 to 85 percent below current levels.
But what Rock wants is for the New England report to strike a chord with individuals so that they will want to do their part to blunt the consequences of climate change.
"Everyone can have an impact," he said. "I think we tend to look at big business and power-generating stations in the Midwest as the significant source of (the greenhouse gas) carbon dioxide, but in fact it's the automobile.
"If you're getting 15 to 17, 18, 19 miles per gallon, and you could be getting 30, 40, 50," he said, "then you're part of the problem."
Staff Writer Meredith Goad can be contacted at 791-6332 or at:
mgoad@pressherald.com  
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (93%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); WEATHER (79%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); SKIING (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (73%); SEVERE WEATHER (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); AIR POLLUTION (50%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (50%)

Company: UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE   (57%);  UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE  (57%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE   (57%);  UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE  (57%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%)

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); PORTLAND, ME, USA (92%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); RICHMOND, VA, USA (53%); NORTHEAST USA (95%); MAINE, USA (94%); NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (93%); MIDWEST USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: August 30, 2001


End of Document


Highway demonstration about climate change connects dots for drivers
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
May 5, 2012 Saturday


Copyright 2012 Bangor Daily News
Length: 387 words
Byline: Heather Steeves BDN Staff
Body


BELFAST, Maine -- Heidi Brugger wanted Mainers to connect the dots between changes around the state and climate change, so she made actual dots. On Saturday morning, 15 people lined up the side of Route 1 in Belfast, holding signs for Climate Impacts Day.
Brugger wrote out short poems and divided them into several signs, so drivers could read them on their morning drive.
One of the poems, spread out on big, brown dots along the highway, read:
"Deer ticks bite
They make us sick
Invading Maine
Too darn quick
Climate change."
"Climate change is making an impact on people's lives. It affects business and lifestyle in Maine. Like when kids go to play in the woods, now they have to get checked for ticks. Thirty years ago, we never checked for ticks -- there were no ticks in Maine," Brugger said.
Ticks die when the ground enters a deep freeze in the winter, but because Maine has had warmer winters, there have been more ticks, Brugger explained.
The event was part of Climate Impacts Day, a special day organized by 350.org, a website that pushes for awareness that 350 carbon parts per million is the amount the Earth's atmosphere can safely contain. It currently contains 392 parts per million, according to the website.
Amy Kennedy, 22, of Unity, took a break from finals week at Unity College to hold a sign. Hers was part of a maple syrup poem, "Maple sap slows its drip of syrup. We barely get a lick. Climate change."
"This is what I'm going to be doing for the rest of my life -- climate change activism," said Kennedy, who will graduate next week with a degree in environmental policy. She got a job for a nonprofit in Boston working as an environmental activist.
Kennedy liked the Saturday morning protest because she said it connected extreme weather to climate change and to people's daily lives.
"This resonates with people in Maine. They might see a lack of maple syrup, but this brings it to their attention with a focus on climate change," she said, pausing to wave at cars that honked at her.
On the northbound side of the road, holding the "deer ticks bite" sign was Beverly Roxby. Roxby is a grandmother of two young boys and she worries about them inheriting a polluted, damaged planet.
"The public needs to be reminded that we care about this enough to stand outside on a dreary day and remind them," Roxby said.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (78%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (74%); SEVERE WEATHER (73%); WEATHER (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (69%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (68%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); BANGOR, ME, USA (59%); BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (59%); MAINE, USA (92%); EARTH (79%)

Load-Date: May 6, 2012


End of Document


Why the rush on climate change? Not because world is warming; In fact, it's not. Instead, advocates are worried people will find out their scare-mongering is false.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
July 3, 2009 Friday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2009 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A13
Length: 803 words
Byline: M.D. Harmon staff columnist
Body


The whole climate-change controversy is at the boiling point on several levels, but they tend to get reported episodically: This law is before Congress, that conference met in Copenhagen, these scientists signed yet another report supporting or contradicting this or that claim about the environment, and so forth.
But there is a unifying theme about what's happening very rapidly now on the three major fronts of the controversy, which are 1) domestic politics; 2) international actions; and 3) the mounting challenges to the U.N. report on humanity's influence on future climate.
Let's take the last one first, because it is the springboard to address the first two.
We're finding out that the fabled ''consensus on climate change'' never was much of a consensus at all. But now it's being shredded by major public disputes led by hundreds, if not thousands, of reputable, credentialed scientists who contradict a famous (but flawed) U.N. report's conclusions about environmental changes.
If you haven't heard much about this, don't blame yourself. While much of the debate is occurring here, U.S. media have been curiously silent about it. But much is happening abroad, too, and foreign media are far less reticent about reporting what has happened in Australia, Japan, Poland, Britain, France, New Zealand and many other places, specifically including the coal-powered industrial giants of India and China.
As Kimberly Strassel pointed out in a Wall Street Journal column on June 26 titled ''The Climate Change Climate Change,'' the common theme behind the hurry disaster-predicting advocates are in to pass their hugely expensive and expansive programs is that the science behind ''global warming,'' as described in the U.N.'s IPCC report, is falling apart.
For example, as Strassel noted, 54 prominent U.S. physicists have demanded their professional society reverse its position that ''the science is settled,'' but both Nature and Science magazines have refused to print their statement.
Dissent is growing in Poland, where the Academy of Sciences says climate change is likely not anthropogenic; in Australia and New Zealand, where the governments are backing away from cap-and-trade policies; and in Norway, where Nobel physics prize-winner Ivar Giaever says warming advocates practice ''a new religion.''
In the United States, Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla., has 700 credentialed scientists' names on a statement challenging the IPCC's conclusions - ''13 times the number who authored the report's summary for policymakers,'' Strassel notes.
On the international front, the invaluable Benny Peiser issues a daily e-mail digest of stories, comments and links (subscribe by searching ''Peiser CCNet'') that cover international events.
You'll find why Britain is reeling from the projected costs of its CO2 reduction policies; why the president of France wants the nation's top climate skeptic to head up the ministry of industry and innovation; and why India and China, along with many less-developed countries, are demanding hundreds of billions of dollars in direct transfer payments from the United States before they will join in any sort of climate agreement that will abort their economic growth.
In fact, restrictions on imports from China contained in the House-passed ''cap-and-trade'' law have outraged the Chinese government, which threatens a full-fledged trade war in the midst of a recession.
Did you know that global temperatures have been falling, not rising, for the past decade - despite the IPCC's predictions of a steady rise? Have you ever heard the maxim, ''If the facts contradict the theory, find a new theory'' - a maxim now being ignored by our leaders?
Did you know Bjørn Lomborg, the prominent Danish writer on environmental issues, wants advocates to stop spreading scare stories that have caused ''an unbelievable one-third of our children to believe they don't have a future''?
Of course, fear is a big part of the advocates' strategy.
Meanwhile, the ''cap-and-tax'' bill now coming to a Senate near you would impose costs on individual Americans that credible estimates say will be equivalent to a 50 percent hike in an average income tax bill.
True, the president has said the bill will only cost ''the equivalent of a postage stamp a day.'' But in 2008 he said, ''Under my plan of a cap-and-trade system, electricity rates would necessarily skyrocket'' as power companies passed them on. The price of all fuels and most consumer goods will soar along with power rates.
So, there's a race on. Can the ideologues get a crushing and essentially futile bill in place before the average voter catches on to their scam?
We'll know soon. But this is a fact, not a theory: What's endangered here is your wallet.
M.D. Harmon is an editorial writer. He can be contacted at 791-6482 or at:
mharmon@pressherald.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); UNITED NATIONS (89%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PHYSICS (77%); TRENDS & EVENTS (72%); NOBEL PRIZES (66%); AWARDS & PRIZES (63%); NEWS BRIEFS (60%); RELIGION (50%)

Company:  WALL STREET JOURNAL (54%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (78%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%)

Person: JIM INHOFE (57%)

Geographic: PORTLAND, ME, USA (90%); AUSTRALIA (92%); NEW ZEALAND (92%); AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND (79%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); FRANCE (70%); POLAND (69%)

Load-Date: July 3, 2009


End of Document


When reading and experts changed the mind of a climate change skeptic
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
June 7, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Bangor Daily News
Length: 595 words
Body


Reading, as the decades-old TV spots used to remind us, is fundamental. With an added twist, reading is fundamental to understanding climate change.
NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine was a long-time climate change denier. But, now that he heads a federal agency that conducts a lot of research about conditions on Earth, the former congressman says he understands that climate change is happening, and that humans are causing it.
The source of his conversion? Reading, and talking to experts. So, three cheers for reading and listening to experts, the basic building blocks for understanding, well, pretty much everything. We hope that other Trump administration officials follow Bridenstine's lead.
"I heard a lot of experts, and I read a lot," Bridenstine told The Washington Post in a recent interview. "I came to the conclusion myself that carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas that we've put a lot of it into the atmosphere and therefore we have contributed to the global warming that we've seen."
"And we've done it in really significant ways," he said.
Just five years ago, Bridenstine, a conservative, three-term representative from Oklahoma, denied that human activity is responsible for a warming planet, sea level rises and other climate changes.
"Global temperatures stopped rising 10 years ago," he said in a 2013 speech on the House floor. "Global temperature changes, when they exist, correlate with sun output and ocean cycles." Climate scientists long refuted such claims.
One place where Bridenstine differed with his fellow climate change skeptics was his willingness to study it. That willingness to seek and understand new information, perhaps from within the agency he oversees, appears to have changed his mind.
We'd suggest that Bridenstine lead a book group where he can suggest, and interpret, reading materials for his former colleagues and current administration colleagues who refuse to be swayed by actual evidence that the planet is warming at an alarming rate.
Bridenstine can use his own conversion as an example for Scott Pruitt, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, for example. Pruitt faces near daily ethics scandals, but he is also a climate change denier who is rolling back environmental protections under the guise of helping businesses. Last year, Pruitt said that he did not believe humans were a "primary contributor" to climate change. A federal judge last week ordered Pruitt to provide evidence to back up his claims.
Bridenstine's biggest job is to convince his boss, President Donald Trump, that climate change is real and that the US needs to do something about it. He also needs to convince the president not to cut funding for NASA's climate research programs.
Trump has called climate change " a hoax" made up by the Chinese to doom the American economy. He has signed numerous executive orders that will increase climate-change causing pollution. He has also declared that the US will leave an international accord aimed at reducing such pollution to ease the consequences of climate change. If the US officially withdraws, which is a long process, it will be the only country in the world that is not a signatory to the accord. Despite its years-long civil war, Syria joined the accord last year.
It is encouraging that hearing from experts and reading scientific material have convinced the NASA chief of the realities of climate change. Now, he needs to spread that message throughout Washington and the country.
Follow BDN Editorial & Opinion on Facebook for the latest opinions on the issues of the day in Maine.
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GLOBAL WARMING (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); SPACE PROGRAMS (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); GREENHOUSE GASES (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (75%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (75%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (75%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (73%); ETHICS (72%); CONSERVATION (71%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (60%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (50%); JUDGES (50%); SCANDALS (50%)

Company:  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (56%)

Organization: READING IS FUNDAMENTAL (84%)

Ticker: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

Industry: NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); GLOBAL WARMING (91%); SPACE PROGRAMS (90%)

Person: JIM BRIDENSTINE (79%); SCOTT PRUITT (79%); ABBY FINKENAUER (77%); DONALD TRUMP (74%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (89%); EARTH (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: June 7, 2018


End of Document


Monday, July 19, 2021: Gratitude for Afghanistan veterans, prioritize the poor in media coverage, climate change hysteria
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
July 17, 2021 Saturday


Copyright 2021 Bangor Daily News
Length: 560 words
Body


Letters submitted by BDN readers are verified by BDN Opinion Page staff. Send your letters toÂ letters@bangordailynews.com
Gratitude for Afghanistan veterans
The Bangor Daily News recently wrote an excellent editorialÂ about how we should be grateful to the veterans of World War II. Americans should also be reminded to express the same gratitude to the veterans of the 20-year war in Afghanistan.
In 2001 and 2002, American forces succeeded in their mission to remove the Taliban from power and to destroy the Al Qaeda base campsÂ in Afghanistan. Unfortunately, a brief successful mission became a long 20-year unsuccessful war. In the coming months, the Taliban, who I thinkÂ are religious barbarians, will likelyÂ retake control of Afghanistan.
The political leaders in the Bush and Obama administrations failed in their oversight of the war. The American military forces and their NATO allies did not fail; they fulfilled their pledge to duty, honor and country; and Americans should show gratitude for their service in the 20-year war.
We should also show gratitude to the Afghan civilians who served with our military forces and give them and their families an opportunity to resettle in America. America will be enriched by Afghan refugees just as we were enriched by the Vietnamese refugees after the Vietnam War.
Stephen Freeman
Presque Isle
Prioritize the poor in media coverage
The hyped media coverage of the tiny protests in Cuba is a sharp contrast to the relatively scant coverageÂ of theÂ  massive farmers protestsÂ in India, the economic justice protestsÂ in Columbia, and the protests for sovereignty and stabilityÂ in Haiti for the last three years.
In my opinion,Â only when it serves U.S. imperial interests does the U.S. media cover protests. Right-wing Cuban exiles in south Florida exert a disproportionate amount of influenceÂ in D.C. and in the media.Â 
The same Cuban exiles who support these tiny protests are the same group that lobbies for sanctions Â against their homelandÂ -- sanctions that cause the very issues being raised by these small groups of protesters.
The U.S. media needs to prioritize poor and working class values. Where are the stories about the damageÂ U.S. sanctions are causing in Cuba and all over the world? The Cuban government deliversÂ  free health careÂ to all its citizens. Does the U.S.?
To me,Â the U.S. media is so biased towards the monied interests of lobbyists and destructive forces that it has lost all credibility.
Andrew Funaro
Lincoln
Climate change hysteria
Frederick Ashmore's recent commentsÂ against carbon credits and how climate change fleeces the public (in the BDN on July 5) is true and timely. He notes that carbon creditsÂ are a "big ponzi scam" Again correct.
Because of climate change hysteria, citizens will be saddled with more regulations, higher taxes, and nothing will happen. As some scientists and realists have argued, climate change has always happened and always will. Man can do nothing about it.
God created the climate and God is in charge of it. One of the first noted climate changes wasÂ  2,000 years ago. In the 1800s,Â some years had no summer. In the 1900s and 1990s there were hot and cold periodsÂ and we lived with them.
Tax money allocated for climate change must be spent on infrastructure, elderly and law enforcement to do the most good for all people.
Fred Hartman
Whiting
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TALIBAN (90%); VETERANS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ANTI-CASTRO CUBANS (89%); TRENDS & EVENTS (89%); LOBBYING (88%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (87%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (86%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (85%); VIETNAM WAR (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); REFUGEES (77%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (77%); US-CUBA DIPLOMATIC RELATIONSHIP (74%); NEGATIVE NEWS (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CARBON OFFSETS (60%); EMISSIONS CREDITS (60%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (59%); PONZI SCHEMES (50%)

Organization:  AL-QAEDA (83%)

Industry: CARBON OFFSETS (60%); EMISSIONS CREDITS (60%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (91%); MAINE, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); CUBA (93%); HAITI (79%); INDIA (79%); VIET NAM (69%)

Load-Date: July 21, 2021


End of Document


GLOBAL WARMING REPORT SHIFTS TERMS OF DEBATE;
Climate change is real, the Bush administration concludes.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
June 4, 2002 Tuesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2002 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6A
Length: 363 words
Series: EDITORIAL FOCUS: ENVIRONMENT
Body

Greenhouse gases are on the rise "as a result of human activities, causing global mean surface air temperature and subsurface ocean temperature to rise."
No, it's no a press release from the Sierra Club, but the latest climate report from the United States, approved by the White House. As such, it is a remarkable turnaround from previous statements that attempted to discredit the science behind global warming and the role human activities have played.
While it maintains that the true scope of global warming remains unknown, the administration concedes that the burning of fossil fuels is primarily responsible for a substantial increase in greenhouse gases.
"This increase," the report notes, "has altered the chemical composition of the Earth's atmosphere and has likely affected the global climate system." It predicts that U.S. temperatures will rise five to nine degrees in the next 100 years, eliminating some ecosystems while introducing new ones.
Doubters of climate change have relied on minority reports that attend to almost every scientific development.  Nonetheless, the phenomenon of global warming has been recognized and defended by the great majority of climate scientists, as well as by international panels of specialists assembled specifically to weigh the evidence and draw conclusions.
We hope the Bush administration's new views move the debate to a more fruitful controversy: What, if anything, should be done in the face of climate change?
Environmentalists have argued that dramatically curtailing the use of fossil fuels will slow and possibly reverse climate change. The report, however, suggests a different approach - instead of focusing on prevention, the U.S. should stabilize the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and prepare for changes. "Adapting to a changing climate is inevitable," the report declares. "The question is whether we adapt poorly or well."
Although dealing with the consequences of global warming is better than sticking one's head in the sand, the U.S. should recognize that its policies also drive climate change. Real efforts to reduce emissions among all nations may mean adapting to fewer changes in the long run.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); GREENHOUSE GASES (99%); GLOBAL WARMING (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); SALTWATER ECOSYSTEMS (78%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (74%); APPROVALS (72%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (72%)

Company: SIERRA CLUB  (58%)

Organization: SIERRA CLUB  (58%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (92%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (79%); EMISSIONS (78%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%)

Geographic: PORTLAND, ME, USA (90%); EARTH (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: June 4, 2002


End of Document


As Maine's summers get hotter, researchers say the state is ready to take action on climate change
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
September 24, 2019 Tuesday


Copyright 2019 Bangor Daily News
Length: 452 words
Byline: Eesha Pendharkar BDN Staff
Body


The sporadic 90-degree summer days in Maine are going to occur much more often in the next century. The Gulf of Maine is warming faster than 99 percent of the world's oceans, which means uncertainty for the lobster industry.
However, University of Maine climate change researchers are hopeful that from the individual level to the state Legislature, Maine is ready to take action on climate change.
A day after Gov. Janet Mills announced her intention to make Maine carbon neutral by 2045 at the United Nations Climate Change Summit in New York, three climate change experts from UMaine had a conversation with the public about threats, impact and mitigation of climate change at a Bangor Daily News event.
"We need to think about climate change being this very, very immense change," said Paul Mayewski, director of the Climate Change Institute at UMaine. "Not just temperature."
Climate change also impacts air quality, Mayewski said, and poor air quality has been linked to diseases such as cancer and autism.
Based on the Arctic warming, Mayewski said that climate change is happening faster than expected. The eastern Arctic climate has changed by 8 or 9 degrees in about five years, according to the Climate Change Institute's research.
Watch: Dr. Cindy Isenhour discusses social sciences and climate change
[bdnvideo id="2874592"]
"Climate can change faster than a political cycle," he said. "We need to not prepare ourselves for linear change; we need to prepare ourselves for very, very fast change."
However, extensive climate data collection and verification as well as mathematical modeling allow for precise climate future predictions, according to state Climatologist Sean Birkel.
"Looking into the future, there are different outcomes depending upon the trajectory of greenhouse gas emissions, land use changes and broader societal decisions," he said.
The speakers also dismissed some of the common misconceptions about climate change.
"There is no such thing as a tipping point for the entire planet where everything goes downhill," Mayewski said. "As long as one is prepared for plausible scenarios for the future, you can look for opportunities."
Anthropologist and climate change professor Cindy Isenhour attended the U.N. summit in New York on Monday, and she said that she was hopeful that people were treating climate change as the serious issue that it is.
Mayewski echoed the hopeful sentiment.
"There is a tremendous groundswell in this country, in particular in places like Maine where we're so dependent on our natural environment," Mayewski said, "to understand what's going on, and to try and effect change."
Watch: Dr. Sean Birkel discusses creation of Maine Climate Council
[bdnvideo id="2874593"]
Â 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (89%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); EMISSIONS (77%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); UNITED NATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); AIR QUALITY (73%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (72%); CANCER (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); GREENHOUSE GASES (72%); MODELING & SIMULATION (72%); OCEANS (72%); MATHEMATICS (63%); AUTISM (52%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MAINE (58%)

Industry: EMISSIONS (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); MODELING & SIMULATION (72%)

Person: JANET MILLS (79%)

Geographic: BANGOR, ME, USA (90%); MAINE, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); EARTH (79%); ARCTIC (92%)

Load-Date: September 25, 2019


End of Document


Page 8 of 9Could it happen; Abrupt climate change shaped Earth's past, threatens its future


 


 



Page 14 of 15Maine can change the debate on climate change


 


 



Page 17 of 18Maine fisheries and blueberries could be at stake due to climate change, report says


 


 



Page 20 of 21Climate change expected to shift Maine's planting seasons. It's just a matter of when. Â 


 


 



Page 23 of 24Janet Mills moves Maine in right direction on climate change


 


 



Page 25 of 26UMaine team researching ways to help farmers adapt to climate change


 


 



Page 28 of 29Maine gardeners facing realities, challenges of climate change


 


 



Page 32 of 33Science predicted the eclipse, so why do so many doubt climate change?


 


 



Page 34 of 35Curbing climate change has a dollar value. This is how we measure it.


 


 



Page 32 of 36Climate change demands our attention on Election Day and beyond


 


 



Page 34 of 36Follow the money in the climate change debate; A mandatory, flexible climate program is good for business, according to 10 top U.S. CEOs.


 


 



Page 38 of 39Experts identify Maine wildlife, plants vulnerable to climate change


 


 



Page 41 of 42Experts identify Maine wildlife, plants vulnerable to climate change


 


 



Page 44 of 45Friday, Sept. 22, 2017: Death of a dog, time to talk climate change, investigate DHHS negligence


 


 



Page 47 of 48Friday, Sept. 22, 2017: Death of a dog, time to talk climate change, investigate DHHS negligence


 


 



Page 50 of 51Broad environmental efforts await Maine lawmakers;Bills sponsored this session address electronics waste, mercury in equipment and climate change.


 


 



Page 55 of 56How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry


 


 



Page 58 of 59How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry


 


 



Page 61 of 62How climate change is affecting the Maine maple syrup industry


 


 



Page 64 of 65Thursday, Dec. 21, 2017: Crack down on drug dealers, adopt a flat tax, climate change threatens business


 


 



Page 68 of 69Monday, March 18, 2019: Inevitable climate consequences, Collins' judicial votes matter, Local effects of climate change


 


 



Page 71 of 72Monday, March 18, 2019: Inevitable climate consequences, Collins' judicial votes matter, Local effects of climate change


 


 



Page 74 of 75Snow in April is no disproof of climate change; The biggest enemy we face isn't climate change, but denial.


 


 



Page 76 of 77CLIMATE CHANGE PUTS HEAT ON REGION;Officials hope that the findings in a new report will make global warming relevant to the public.


 


 



Page 79 of 80Highway demonstration about climate change connects dots for drivers


 


 



Page 81 of 82Why the rush on climate change? Not because world is warming; In fact, it's not. Instead, advocates are worried people will find out their scare-mongering is fa....


 


 



Page 84 of 85When reading and experts changed the mind of a climate change skeptic


 


 



Page 87 of 88Monday, July 19, 2021: Gratitude for Afghanistan veterans, prioritize the poor in media coverage, climate change hysteria


 


 



Page 90 of 91GLOBAL WARMING REPORT SHIFTS TERMS OF DEBATE;Climate change is real, the Bush administration concludes.


 


 



Page 92 of 92As Maine's summers get hotter, researchers say the state is ready to take action on climate change


 


 

