


Biden administration’s immigration policies more pressing issue for nation than climate change
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 17, 2021 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2021 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: MAIN; Pg. 21A
Length: 91 words
Byline: Staff
Highlight: READERS WRITE
Body


Contrary to the Biden administration and the news media, climate change is not the most pressing issue this county faces. Instead, it’s at the bottom of the list for the American public.
President Biden’s open borders immigration policies have created uncontrolled chaos for U.S. citizens. And it’s obvious that those who want to change America are attempting to change the political demographics of Texas to Democrat. The Democratic party wants to assure that outcome and wants to federalize elections before the 2022 midterms.
THOMAS GAMBESKI, CANTON
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: IMMIGRATION (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (88%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (88%); POLITICAL PARTIES (87%); pagesuite (%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: October 17, 2021


End of Document


AJC EXPLAINER CLIMATE POLITICS; ; How climate 'change' turned into a 'crisis'
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 24, 2019 Saturday
Main Edition


Copyright 2019 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 972 words
Byline: Nedra Rhone

Staff
Highlight: As debate over the environment evolved, so did the words used.
Body


A few months into the 2020 presidential campaign, the environment is emerging as one of the most discussed issues on the campaign trail. Six in 10 Americans are concerned or alarmed about global warming, according to researchers at Yale and George Mason Universities, and presidential hopefuls are taking notice.
Candidates have rolled out significant climate policy proposals, and although this week a panel of the Democratic National Committee denied a presidential debate devoted to climate change, CNN and MSNBC will host town halls on the topic in September.
As debate surrounding the issue has evolved, so have the words used to describe it.
Years ago before scientists knew what human impact would mean for the planet, they called it "inadvertent climate modification." Now, environmental activists and some lawmakers say the planet is in trouble, and they're calling it a crisis.
As knowledge and understanding of the climate have deepened, so has the desire to give the topic a more accurate label -- and possibly engage voters from both major political parties.
This spring when Spark Neuro, a company which monitors brain and nervous system activity to measure how people are feeling, tested words for environmental changes, "climate crisis" rose to the top. Gut reactions to "climate change" showed the term to be innocuous. "Global warming"was deemed alarmist. Neither term elicited emotional reactions from Democrats or Republicans. Climate crisis, however, "could strike a bipartisan chord as a more reasonable observation," said the survey results. "To reframe the issue is to engage unconvinced voters, and ... 'climate crisis' may hit the sweet spot."
The words are a reflection of personal politics, said linguistic and political experts, but it is unclear whether changing terminology equals action, specifically among the unconvinced.
"I think the change in terminology probably creates better headlines, but I don't think it is changing policy much," said Andrew Pieper, associate professor of political science at Kennesaw State University. "It is probably even hurting politicians because they have this huge incentive to avoid the language their opponents use."
Words matter, and what we say conveys our attitude toward what we are talking about, said Sarah Blackwell, professor of linguistics at the University of Georgia. "Very rarely are words neutral. They are typically positively or negatively nuanced in some way," she said.
"Inadvertent climate modification" never really took off, for obvious reasons. Scientists would later use "global warming" to describe surface temperature increases due to rising levels of greenhouse gases. They used "climatic change" or "climate change" to describe longterm changes in Earth's climate, which include global warming.
For decades, despite its limitations, "global warming" was the term of choice in popular culture. Then in 2002, Republican strategist Frank Luntz suggested President George W. Bush use only the term "climate change."
It was less ominous sounding, Luntz said. And it was a term supported by the scientific community, including NASA which uses the term "global climate change" in communications.
But words weren't the only thing changing. In the 1990s, climate policies had been largely bipartisan, said politicians.A decade later, those policies had become partisan issues and the words a candidate or lawmaker used to talk about them became part of their personal branding.
"We used to think of culture wars and identity politics as only being about gender mores and traditional family values, but as the parties have become more ideologically split, every policy debate is potentially identity politics," said Pieper of Kennesaw State.
"In Washington they argue over the semantics," said Jason Buelterman, mayor of Tybee Island. "All I can say is that from my perspective as a local official on a barrier island that is low to the sea, we have experienced the effects of sea level rise and we are dealing with it, regardless of what they do in Washington."
It's hard to say how "climate crisis" originated. Al Gore was already making references to a crisis when his 2006 documentary "An Inconvenient Truth" was released. Environmental advocacy groups were also attaching more urgency to the climate conversation by using words that would serve as a call to action. Earlier this year, Gore's Climate Reality Project launched an online petition asking news organizations to make the switch.
In May, the Guardian updated its style guide to include "climate crisis" as the preferred term over "climate change."
But some local politicians say altering the course of climate change will require much more than new terminology.
"I don't need fancy talk," said state Rep. Al Williams, D-Midway, a self-proclaimed Gullah Geechee from coastal Georgia. "It is a crisis because unfortunately politics has become so divided and so partisan.We need to sit down in a bipartisan effort and get back to doing what we did and make sure we survive and leave something for the next generation."
(Box)
BALANCED COVERAGE
The debate over dealing with our changing climate is divisive.We always try to present multiple points of view so that readers can reach their own conclusions.
Today's story includes a climate activist, a Republican strategist who encouraged the use of the phrase "climate change,"professors who track political speech and the mayor of Tybee Island, who is dealing with rising seas.
The debate over dealing with our changing climate is divisive.We always try to present multiple points of view so that readers can reach their own conclusions.
Today's story includes a climate activist, a Republican strategist who encouraged the use of the phrase "climate change,"professors who track political speech and the mayor of Tybee Island, who is dealing with rising seas.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LINGUISTICS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); EMOTIONS (77%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (77%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (73%); GREENHOUSE GASES (72%)

Organization:  DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (57%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%)

Person: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

Geographic: EARTH (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: August 24, 2019


End of Document


AJC SPECIAL REPORT; Alarm, skepticism greet climate change warning
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 9, 2015 Sunday
First Replate Edition


Copyright 2015 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 2419 words
Byline: Dan Chapman, Greg Bluestein

Staff
Highlight: Rising seas, dying marshes pose threat to Georgia's coastal areas.
Body


ST. MARYS --- Georgia's wildlife agency minced no words recently in declaring climate change "a threat inherent with uncertainty," perhaps the state's starkest warning ever on a politically sensitive subject dismissed by many elected officials.
Here, though, on Georgia's 100-mile-long coast, most everybody takes seriously rising seas and dying marshes caused by drastic changes in the Earth's climate. They live already with the proof: greater tidal surges; flooded roads; and ages-old trees killed by salt water creeping further inland.
If the dire predictions of state, federal and university scientists prove true, then billions of dollars of property in Brunswick, Darien, St. Marys and Savannah and on the islands of St. Simons, Sea and Tybee will be under water within a century.
Much of the coast's ecologically critical salt marsh will die off. Upland streams will turn brackish. Sparrows and shrimp will disappear if, as predicted, the Atlantic Ocean rises an additional 3 feet by 2110.
"No matter if you believe climate change is natural or man-made, sea levels are rising and it behooves us to know how to plan and respond," said Clark Alexander, the director of the Applied Coastal Research Laboratory on Skidaway Island. "If we don't start preparing now, it will become a bigger problem later."
Georgia has no grand plan to combat climate change or its effects. State leaders ignore, sidestep or downplay climate-change warnings. Most remain unconvinced of man's role in Earth's warming.
Brian Robinson, a spokesman for Gov. Nathan Deal, wouldn't answer questions about the governor's views on climate change. U.S. Sen. David Perdue, a Republican who lives on Sea Island, a barrier island threatened by rising seas, said "the scientific community is not in total agreement about whether mankind has been a contributing factor."
"That's why we must find an appropriate balance between responsibly protecting the environment and continuing to develop our abundance of natural resources in order to grow the economy and improve people's quality of life," he added in a statement.
David Stooksbury, the former state climatologist, said the unwillingness of leaders to address climate change is dangerous.
"I don't think that most of our elected officials understand the long-term seriousness of what climate change will do to the agricultural economy, public health and the environment," he said. "It will be much cheaper and better for the state if we follow a well-developed plan starting now rather than waiting until we must respond."
Some steps underway
President Barack Obama last week unveiled a major climate-change plan that would reduce carbon dioxide emissions by one-third by 2030. His edict, which met with widespread scorn from many conservatives and others who discount climate change, follows repeated scientific warnings that the Earth is getting hotter. Some states are suing to block the White House ruling; Georgia has yet to take action.
Last year was the warmest since 1880, according to NASA, and the 10 hottest years recorded (with one exception, 1998) have all occurred since 2000. James Hansen, NASA's former lead climate scientist, and 16 co-authors reported last month that glaciers in Greenland and Antarctica will melt 10 times faster than previously estimated. If true, sea levels are projected to rise at least 10 feet within 50 years.
A hotter planet melts icebergs and causes ocean water to warm and expand, fueling the rise of the world's seas and making coastal communities nervous. St. Marys, in Georgia's southeastern corner and surrounded by rivers, creeks and marsh, is precariously perched 10 feet above sea level.
"No one really knows the projected impact of sea rise," said John Holman, the city's manager. "Everyone is trying to understand it. It needs more study. For us, it's an important issue."
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicts that a 3-foot rise in sea level would inundate St. Marys' historic district with its majestic oaks, white picket fences and 1808 Presbyterian church with an iron bell cast by Paul Revere.
Two years ago, the feds put up most of the cost of a $160,000 study intended to alert St. Marys to the potential dangers of climate change. A report, which will detail the costs associated with protecting the city from surging seas, is expected any day.
St. Marys isn't waiting. The City Council voted three years ago to raise the height of first floors in buildings constructed in flood plains. It's considering raising walkways at new municipal buildings to allow water to seep into the ground and not pool or flood. Officials are also weighing an enterprise fund just for stormwater projects. And the city's 2030 strategic plan will likely emphasize rising seas.
"Sea-level rise will be costly, if the projections are accurate, for the city to prepare for," Holman said. "But, by working in advance, we'll get a head start. We'll take precautionary measures."
He added, "I believe we're in better shape than Tybee Island."
As much as two-thirds of the popular beach town near Savannah would disappear by 2110 if NOAA's sea-level predictions hold true.
"It's good to see the state agency charged with protecting Georgia's environment catching up with the military in factoring climate change into long-range plans," said Paul Wolff, a Tybee councilman. "As a resident of a community on the front lines of sea-level rise, I believe every level of government needs to be proactive in reducing, planning for and adapting to the effects of a changing climate."
Last month the wildlife resources division of the Department of Natural Resources issued its State Wildlife Action Plan, or SWAP, which states unequivocally that "climate change presents unprecedented challenges." The federal government requires states to submit a SWAP every 10 years or risk losing conservation money for at-risk fish and wildlife. Georgia received $1.2 million the past fiscal year.
"Climate change is impacting species and habitats, and these effects are projected to increase substantially over time," the SWAP says. "These climate-driven changes will profoundly affect our ability to conserve fish and wildlife and their habitats."
The first SWAP, issued in 2005, mentioned climate change and global warming, but it said "local effects are often difficult to quantify." Then-Gov. Sonny Perdue followed up a year later with a State Energy Strategy, which stated that "strong scientific evidence exists that increasing emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (GHG) are affecting Earth's climate." The 138-page report, with three pages devoted to climate change, listed potential dangers and recommended that the state inventory carbon dioxide emissions.
South viewed at risk
A tidal gauge off Fort Pulaski near Tybee has tracked the slow but steady rise --- 11 inches over the past 80 years --- of the Atlantic Ocean. The sea began rising dramatically in the 1990s. Climate scientists now predict an additional 40-inch surge by 2110.
"Every storm that comes ashore will intrude further inland and will become more dangerous, and we will have more days of nuisance flooding," said Alexander of the University of Georgia's Skidaway Institute below Savannah, where scientists study marine and environmental sciences.
Georgia Tech researchers estimate that 30 percent, or 419 square miles, of Chatham, Liberty and McIntosh counties will be under water by 2110 if the sea keeps rising at its current rate. Georgia's barrier islands will be swamped, and some coastal towns will experience billions of dollars of damage to municipal infrastructure --- road, water and sewer --- and private property.
Man, though, can adapt. The natural world may take it on the chin as salt water pushes further inland into fresh water. Two-thirds of Georgia's saltwater marsh system --- an ecologically critical habitat for fish and wildlife --- could disappear.
"You have a whole host of species dependent on that salt marsh environment," said Jason Lee, a DNR coastal expert who helped write the SWAP's 11-page section on climate change. "The food web would collapse. Marsh birds would have to seek habitat elsewhere. Shrimp and crabs would be affected. Sea turtles would also be a primary concern, (as) would several shorebirds that nest and forage along the coast. You could see significant ecosystem impacts."
Hotter weather, droughts and more frequent and intense downpours will make an impact on the natural environment statewide, the SWAP reports, and harm North Georgia habitats for mountain brook trout and patch-nosed salamanders. Rising temperatures --- some estimates predict an 8- to 20-degree increase in future Julys --- would allow invasive species such as kudzu, gypsy moths and feral hogs to spread further north.
"It's a really good sign that the state of Georgia is recognizing and planning for the impact of climate change," said Jennette Gayer, the director of Environment Georgia. "This is a great first step, and I hope to see more forward-thinking reports like this to really plan for the future."
Other state agencies and universities have also sounded the climate-change alarm. The website for the DNR's coastal resources division says that "the Earth's changing climate is one of coastal Georgia's greatest environmental challenges." A 2012 Georgia Ports Authority presentation listed the impact of rising seas on the docks and terminals.
UGA's agriculture extension agency educates farmers about the risks of climate change. The university's Sea Grant program steers federal and state money to coastal communities, including Tybee and St. Marys, preparing for rising seas, climate change and other threats.
The Georgia Initiative for Climate and Society, a network of UGA scientists, including Marshall Shepherd, seeks to better understand the threats posed by a warming climate. Shepherd, who runs the university's Atmospheric Sciences Program, says the South is particularly vulnerable to climate change.
All the warnings, though, have failed to translate into concerted and meaningful action by Georgia leaders.
Many skeptics among leadership
The governor hasn't crafted an energy strategy as his predecessor did. The 2006 carbon registry proposal is dead. State senators passed a resolution in 2012 urging Congress to prevent the Environmental Protection Agency from further regulating greenhouse gases without more research on carbon dioxide's impact on climate change.
States, though, must take climate change seriously or risk losing hundreds of millions of federal dollars.
Georgia is one of nine states that doesn't mention climate change in federally required disaster mitigation plans. It has until 2019 to comply. But, starting next year, the Federal Emergency Management Agency will only give money to states with plans that address climate change. Through 2012, according to the Center for Climate Change Law, Georgia had received about $180 million in FEMA grants to help buy land vulnerable to flooding as well as other prevention measures.
The SWAP recommends a slew of research and conservation measures to combat climate change over the next decade. Sea turtles, saltmarsh sparrows, Nelson's sparrows and right whales should be further monitored and protected.
Butterfly and migratory bird habitats within utility corridors should be upgraded. The northern march of kudzu and gypsy moths should be halted. Large swaths of the Altamaha River corridor, and other vulnerable waterways, should be joined and protected to allow unfettered migration of animals. Streams and wetlands should be further buffered.
It's questionable, though, whether state and federal officials will put up the money to help a warming planet.
"By not having a comprehensive climate-change plan and following it, Georgians, in the long run, will be spending more to adapt," said Stooksbury, the state's former climatologist who was fired by Deal in 2011. "I am not very hopeful that these changes will be made until is it painfully obvious."
Deal, like many Georgia politicians, takes a half-pregnant position on climate change. Most don't deny that the climate is changing, yet they question whether the problem is man-made. Deal says it's a federal, not state, issue. Yet, he passed on an opportunity in September to slam the EPA over efforts to curb power plant emissions.
The chairmen of the state House and Senate committees that craft environmental and energy policies blame nature, not man, for the projected surge in temperatures and sea levels.
"We should understand that Mother Nature is the lead power in climate change," said state Sen. Ross Tolleson, the chairman of the Natural Resources and Environment Committee.
State Rep. Don Parsons, the chairman of the House Energy Committee and a Marietta Republican, said "there's always a point when you have to ask about what doing more will cost the state of Georgia."
Some coastal lawmakers also question the urgency to do something about climate change.
"I, for one, don't see it as being a serious problem," said Barry Brown, a Tybee city councilman. "Sometimes these things just get brought up to get people in a panic to buy something. Whether or not they have the facts to back it up, I haven't seen any."
Georgia hasn't gone as far as neighboring states in dismissing climate change. Florida Gov. Rick Scott reportedly ordered government officials in March not to use the term in reports or press releases. In 2012, the North Carolina Legislature imposed a four-year moratorium on state rules, plans or policies based on expected changes in sea level.
U.S. Sen. Johnny Isakson, like Perdue, cites "mixed scientific evidence" about the origins of Earth's warming. While both senators acknowledged in January that "climate change is not a hoax," they also opposed legislation linking changing temperatures to human activity. Each takes a conservative, pro-business position that carbon dioxide regulations will hamper business.
"We all care about the environment," Isakson said on the floor of the Senate in March. "We just don't all subscribe to the same theory about what happens."
Wolff, the Tybee councilman and environmentalist, says politicians in Washington and Atlanta need to embrace the dangers of climate change, regardless of who's at fault, before it's too late.
"It's unfortunate that they don't seem to understand the urgency we're facing on the coast," he said. "They should be doing a lot more to (fight) climate change. The science is irrefutable. It isn't hypothetical to us. It's real life."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); COASTAL AREAS (90%); WILDLIFE (90%); ISLANDS & REEFS (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (79%); GLOBAL WARMING (79%); CONSERVATION (78%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); NATURAL RESOURCES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WETLANDS (78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); GOVERNORS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT (75%); EMISSIONS (73%); GREENHOUSE GASES (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (72%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (72%); OCEANS (67%); US CONGRESS (67%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (79%); AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT (75%); EMISSIONS (73%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (79%); DAVID A PERDUE (58%); NATHAN DEAL (57%)

Geographic: GEORGIA, USA (94%); EARTH (92%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: August 9, 2015


End of Document


READERS WRITE Donald Trump can't have it both ways Climate scientists losing their credibility Grandchildren will suffer for climate change
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 30, 2016 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2016 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 23A
Length: 594 words
Byline: Staff
Body


With the elections fast upon us, I urge readers to vote yes for a small increase in sales tax to give MARTA the support it deserves. I ride MARTA frequently, but even if one chooses not to ride MARTA, we will all benefit from improved air quality and less traffic congestion. Many people must rely on MARTA to get to work, doctor appointments, etc. For them, MARTA is most important. But all of the Atlanta area benefits when citizens are able to get to employment. Many of us who prefer to take MARTA find it so much easier and less expensive than driving and parking. We must reduce carbon pollution as quickly as possible -- for our personal health and the health of the planet. We need legislation for a carbon fee with dividend, but we can reduce our carbon footprint right now by using MARTA.
KATHERINE MITCHELL, ATLANTA
Donald Trump brags on camera about his exploits against women and many of these women have now come forward to tell their "Trump" story. What does the Republican candidate have to say? "I didn't do it. How can you believe those people?" is his response. In the next breath, he sticks to his story that the Central Park Five are guilty of rape regardless of the evidence showing their innocence. He says, "But they confessed on the interrogation tapes!" He doesn't take into consideration that those confessions were coerced, that there was never any evidence to convict and that the real rapist was later caught. So, in the case of five young men falsely accused, Trump says, "Look at the tape!" yet in his own video where he admits wrongful actions, he shouts, "The tape is not me!" You can't have it both ways, Donald, and neither can those who defend you.
MICHAEL BUCHANAN, ALPHARETTA
The global warming crowd likes to try to discredit skeptics like myself by calling us "climate change deniers." They are not being honest with that characterization, however, because we are not denying that the climate is changing. The climate has always been changing for millions of years. The thing we are skeptical about is that the feeble efforts of mankind have the ability to stop it from changing.
Forty years ago, we were told that we were headed for a new ice age. When that didn't happen, they changed their prediction to radical warming of the planet. Over time, that was not supported by the data, so they changed their warning to the ambiguous "climate change." None of their predictions have come true, and the global warming alarmists are rapidly losing their credibility. The recent desperate attempts to criminalize skeptics have made many more people question the global warming scam.
BILL WHITLOW, AUBURN
Jay Bookman points out how climate change concerns have been ignored in this year's campaigns ( "The Crisis," Opinion, Oct. 23). He is correct that the issue is the most important one for our children and grandchildren. Granted, there are many potential, important issues to be discussed but few are of such importance to our grandchildren as that of climate change. It is very unfortunate that many politicians focus on short-term needs rather than the potential future catastrophe. More unfortunate is the huge procrastination penalty with the climate issue. The longer we wait to do something, the exponentially greater the cost will be. We can't just "turn off" climate change. Although I will not, the additional greenhouse gasses we put into the atmosphere will be around for hundreds of years. So, sorry grandchildren, some of us tried to do something, but most of us just didn't care about you.
DAVID GREENLAND, SANDY SPRINGS
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (77%); WOMEN (74%); TAX INCREASES (73%); AIR POLLUTION (72%); AIR QUALITY (72%); GRANDCHILDREN (71%); NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL NEWS (71%); SEX OFFENSES (70%); ENVIRONMENTAL FOOTPRINT (69%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (88%)

Load-Date: October 30, 2016


End of Document


Climate-change claims in 2012
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 29, 2012 Saturday
Main Edition


Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 1019 words
Byline: Eric Stirgus

Staff
Body


President Barack Obama told reporters in his first news conference since being re-elected he will seek ways to address climate change --- another issue that has divided Democrats and Republicans in recent years and should continue to generate some interesting claims to test on the Truth-O-Meter.
Below are some abbreviated versions of past fact checks about the topic. Look for the complete fact checks at the PolitiFact online sites.
Want to comment on our Truth-O-Meter rulings? It's easy. Just go to our Facebook page: www.facebook.com/politifact.georgia?fref=ts. Readers can also follow us on Twitter at: PolitiFactGA.
Rick Perry: Scientists are "questioning the original idea that manmade global warming is what is causing the climate to change. ... (It is) more and more being put into question."
The Republican governor from Texas has made it clear he doesn't believe that human beings are contributing to global warming, and he expounded on the issue in detail at a stop in New Hampshire during his short run for president in the 2012 race.
PolitiFact asked the Perry campaign for comment on this, but we didn't hear back. In response to similar questions from The Washington Post, the Perry campaign pointed to various writings questioning climate change. But the Post's report noted these writings were anecdotal and "not evidence of the groundswell of opposition suggested by Perry."
PolitiFact reviewed several reports on the subject. Each concluded that the emissions of greenhouse gases from human activity were a factor in global warming.
A 2010 study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences --- the official publication of the United States National Academy of Sciences --- found that out of 1,372 climate researchers under review, approximately 97 percent to 98 percent of those actively publishing in the field said they believe human beings are causing climate change.
Perry's remarks give the impression that the science of global warming is in dispute, that some scientists feel one way, and some scientists feel another way. He says that skepticism is growing. In fact, our research shows that's not the case. PolitiFact found that there is solid consensus among the major scientific organizations and that the skeptics seem to be a small minority. PolitiFact rated his statement False.
www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2011/aug/22/rick-perry/rick-perry-says-more-and-more-scientists-are-quest/
Barack Obama says Texas wildfires are linked to climate change.
Obama ridiculed Texas Gov. Rick Perry in a September 2011 speech when the president said, "You've got a governor whose state is on fire denying climate change."
A White House spokesman defended Obama's remarks, saying there is a link between severe weather and climate change.
Historically, scientists have drawn a clear distinction between specific weather events and longer-range changes in climate, and that sentiment persists. The situation in Texas that Obama was referring to could be described as something broader than a specific weather event, and there is peer-reviewed evidence linking broader climate change in the American Southwest with the incidence of wildfires in the region.
The Texas state climatologist wrote around that time he believes climate change has had an effect in encouraging the current wildfires, but only as a modest contributing factor. This caution, combined with the difficulty of determining cause and effect in a system as complex as the Earth's atmosphere, led PolitiFact to rate Obama's claim Half True.
www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2011/sep/28/barack-obama/barack-obama-slams-rick-perry-climate-change-citin/
Tim Pawlenty: "The weight of the evidence (on global warming) is that most of it, maybe all of it, is because of natural causes ... it's fair to say the science is in dispute."
Pawlenty, the former Minnesota governor who was briefly in the race for the 2012 GOP presidential nomination, made these comments to The Miami Herald.
PolitiFact divided his statement into two parts:
1) Evidence points toward climate change being primarily a natural, rather than manmade, phenomenon.
2) The science about the causes of global climate change is in dispute.
Based on our research, there is very little dispute in the scientific community, especially among climate specialists, on whether climate change is primarily caused by natural or manmade forces. The majority of scientists polled feel human activity is the primary driver of climate change. Based on scientific studies, global warming over the past 50 years has been primarily driven by human activity.
Pawlenty's claims are both incorrect and misleading to the public, who may not be familiar with the science behind climate change. It is not "fair to say the science is in dispute," as if there are good arguments on both sides. Rather, there is significant scientific consensus that human beings are contributing to global warming. We rated his statement False.
www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2011/aug/14/tim-pawlenty/do-scientists-disagree-about-global-warming/
Florida Wildlife Federation: Claims Ohio Gov. John Kasich says climate change is a problem.
The federation posted billboards around Tampa shortly before the 2012 Republican National Convention with this claim to boost their argument that climate change is a concern among some Republican leaders as well as Democrats.
PolitiFact checked with Kasich's staff to see whether the quote was accurate. Rob Nichols, the governor's spokesman, confirmed that it was taken from a speech Kasich made in May 2012 at a small energy conference in Columbus, Ohio.
But for context, Nichols said there is a little more to Kasich's thoughts on global warming.
"He has said this several times, but what is usually omitted is what is on the back-end of what he has said," Nichols said. "Each time he says it, he has added, 'How big is this? I don't know. Should we overreact to this? No.'"
PolitiFact Ohio rated the statement True.
www.politifact.com/ohio/statements/2012/aug/29/florida-wildlife-federation/convention-billboard-touts-john-kasichs-view-clima/
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); FACT CHECKING (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); GOVERNORS (89%); PRESS CONFERENCES (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (79%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (76%); GREENHOUSE GASES (73%); FIRES (60%); WILDFIRES (60%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (57%);  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (57%); GHC (NYSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); GLOBAL WARMING (89%); EMISSIONS (78%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (76%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (89%); RICK PERRY (89%)

Geographic: TEXAS, USA (93%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: December 29, 2012


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE; CDC cancels climate change, health summit
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 24, 2017 Tuesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 525 words
Byline: Staff and wire reports; AJC staff writer Rosalind Bentley contributed to this article., Staff
Highlight: 'Strategic retreat' heads off conflict, co-sponsor says.
Body


The government's top public health agency has canceled a February conference on climate change and health but isn't saying why publicly.
But a co-sponsor was told by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that the agency was worried how the conference would be viewed by the Trump administration.
In an email response to a request from the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, a CDC spokeswoman wrote that three days before Christmas, the agency began telling registered participants the February 2017 summit would be postponed. :
"We are exploring options to reschedule the meeting while considering budget priorities for fiscal year 2017," the Atlanta-based agency wrote in an official statement. It would also look for "potential overlap with an APHA (American Public Health Association) conference on the same topic also being held later in 2017."
The incoming administration did not ask or order that the meeting be canceled, said Dr. Georges Benjamin, executive director of the American Public Health Association.
"They had no idea or not whether the new administration would be supportive," said Benjamin, whose group was a co-sponsor of the event with the CDC.
Rather, the decision was "a strategic retreat," intended to head off a possible last-minute cancellation or other repercussions from Trump officials who may prove hostile to spending money on climate change science, Benjamin said Monday.
"They decided the better part of valor was to stop and regroup" until it could be discussed with Trump's new health leadership, Benjamin said. A new CDC director has not been named.
Benjamin called the decision understandable but worrisome. He was echoed by Kristie Ebi, a professor of global health at the University of Washington in Seattle, who was invited to speak at the conference.
"In the long run, climate change is affecting the health of Americans," she said. "At some point, I hope they will go forward with the conference."
Ian Karra, an organizer for the Sierra Club, said the move to cancel the summit was "deeply disturbing."
"The Trump administration has a responsibility to take climate change seriously," Karra said. "If the CDC is taking this step preemptively, we hope it will show some climate courage going forward."
Public health experts say climate change is a man-made problem that contributes to a range of health issues and illnesses, including heat stroke and diseases spread by tropical insects. The CDC has a $10 million program on climate and health, and published guidelines to help local health officials deal with human vulnerability to climate change.
In 2012, Trump tweeted that the concept of global warming was created by the Chinese to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive. He later said he was joking, but during the presidential campaign referred to global warming as "a hoax."
Before he took office, Trump met with former Vice President Al Gore and Leonardo DiCaprio, both prominent climate activists. Trump picked Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt as head of the Environmental Protection Agency. During his confirmation hearing, Pruitt backed away from his own past statements and said climate change is real.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (92%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); CLIMATOLOGY (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (89%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); EXECUTIVES (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); HEAT STRESS DISORDERS (50%)

Company:  ATLANTA JOURNAL-CONSTITUTION (72%)

Organization: CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL & PREVENTION (84%); AMERICAN PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATION (83%)

Industry: NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (72%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (72%); SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (72%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (72%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (91%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (90%); PERIODICAL PUBLISHING (90%); PUBLISHING (90%); SPONSORSHIP (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: January 24, 2017


End of Document


Reverse climate change: Plant and preserve global forestland
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
December 23, 2009 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2009 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: OPINION; Pg. 21A
Length: 872 words
Byline: Brian Stone

For the AJC
Body


If there is a silver lining to the failure of the Copenhagen climate accords to produce a legally binding treaty on global warming, it is this: instituting a robust and lasting agreement a year from now is a more desirable outcome than instituting a weak agreement today.
But what variables might change in the near term that could give rise to more favorable conditions for a binding and effective agreement on climate change?
One important shift under way is the growing recognition that greenhouse gas reductions are not the only option we have to slow and ultimately reverse global warming. Restoring and expanding global forests can also cool the planet.
While such a declaration may constitute heresy in a political and scientific arena in which climate change and the greenhouse effect have come to be understood as one and the same, global warming is not driven by greenhouse gases alone.
It is also driven by the quantity of heat that is emitted from the Earth's surface and ultimately absorbed by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
The phenomenon of global warming can be likened to a pot of boiling water: placing a lid over the pot traps outgoing heat energy and raises the temperature inside, but turning up the burner under the pot also raises temperature, quite independent of the placement of the lid.
The extensive loss of forest and other vegetative cover across the Earth's surface is significantly increasing the quantity of heat emitted to the atmosphere, contributing in turn to a rise in temperature.
How significant is the role of global land surface change compared to the role of greenhouse gases in bringing about global warming?
A review of the now extensive scientific literature on land use and climate change appearing in the journal Science concludes that land use change and greenhouse gas emissions may be contributing to climate change in equal parts.
At the scale of the planet as a whole, the influence of deforestation on climate can be hard to discern, as deforestation in one region of the planet can be offset by reforestation in another.
But when measured at the regional to sub-continental scale, the impacts of land use on climate have been shown to be roughly equivalent to the effects of greenhouse gases on temperature.
At the scale of cities, where most of the global population now lives and where approximately 80 percent of greenhouse gases are emitted, land use has a much more pronounced effect on climate than greenhouse gases, contributing to rates of warming that are often double that of the planet as a whole.
In urbanized areas such as Atlanta, land use strategies emphasizing tree planting and the use of reflective building materials are far more likely to lower temperatures over the coming decades than greenhouse gas reductions alone.
Recognition of the direct and significant influence global forests have on temperature, distinct from the more modest benefits forests provide in the form of carbon sequestration, is a potential game changer in the realm of international climate policy.
At present, a principal obstacle to reaching an agreement concerns the limited ability of developing nations to ratchet down carbon emissions from the fossil intensive industries needed to propel their economies.
Yet, many of these same developing nations are home to the globally significant forest ecosystems most in need of protection and regeneration.
Formal recognition of the climate-regulating benefits of forests in international cap and trade programs would create a new mechanism for nations to trade forest regeneration credits in concert with carbon reduction credits.
Developing economies would benefit from a new revenue stream that could be used to modernize industry and reduce emissions; developed economies would benefit from increased flexibility in meeting treaty obligations. And the planet would benefit from having both the land surface and atmospheric drivers of global warming mitigated.
The good news is that global scientists are increasingly aware of the significance of land use to climate change.
A report of contributing scientists to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published in advance of the Copenhagen conference acknowledges for the first time the direct, non-emissions related influence of global deforestation on climate and calls for future IPCC assessments to account for such changes in climate models.
This is a first step toward a more comprehensive approach to climate change. The next step is for climate treaty negotiators to work in the post-Copenhagen period to develop a new international framework for managing climate change, one that capitalizes on the benefits of global forest regeneration for climate change mitigation in concert with emissions reductions.
Such an approach not only makes use of the full array of management tools available to us but also lays the groundwork for a grand bargain between developed and developing economies and, in so doing, provides a promising way forward from Copenhagen.
Brian Stone is a professor of Environmental Planning at the Georgia Institute of Technology. His latest research on land use and climate change appears this month in the Journal of Environmental Science and Technology.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: GREENHOUSE GASES (99%); GLOBAL WARMING (92%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); DEFORESTATION (89%); LAND USE & DEVELOPMENT (89%); LAND USE PLANNING (89%); PLANETS & ASTEROIDS (89%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (78%); EMISSIONS (78%); GLOBALIZATION (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); URBANIZATION (75%); REFORESTATION (70%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (69%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (92%); DEFORESTATION (89%); LAND USE PLANNING (89%); EMISSIONS (78%); REFORESTATION (70%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (78%); EARTH (92%)

Load-Date: December 23, 2009


End of Document


GLOBAL WARMING IN GEORGIA: Southern-fried FORECAST;
Will climate changes be mild or dire? The latest news is chilling
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 29, 2001 Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: @issue;; Next; Column
Length: 3441 words
Byline: JAY BOOKMAN
Body


Near the Brasstown Wilderness
In this narrow North Georgia stream --- no more than two or three feet across --- native brook trout still swim, feed and breed as they have for thousands of years. They've survived logging, agriculture, even the stocking of the more aggressive rainbow trout, an exotic import from Europe.
But the Georgia brookies will not survive global warming.
If temperatures rise as predicted, mountain streams in this state will become too warm to sustain the brook trout, J. Donald Meisner, a zoologist at the University of Toronto, predicts in a study.
That finding doesn't surprise Lee Howard, a fishing guide in North Georgia and president of the local Trout Unlimited chapter. Howard and other volunteers have hauled logs to this stream to create a habitat to help the brook trout survive. He also lobbied to close an old logging road to this area, to make it less accessible to fishermen. But he's not very optimistic.
AJC
"We're about 3,000 feet high right here," says Howard, crouching beneath the canopy of azalea over the streambed. "And this is one of the last strongholds of reproducing brook trout in the state. After this, they really don't have any place to go."
For more than a decade, scientists have been investigating what climate change could do to the environment. Through computer models, field research, laboratory experiments and other work, they are beginning to paint a picture of a much-changed planet.
For most people, though, the global scale of the potential change is hard to grasp. An average worldwide temperature increase of 5 or 10 degrees seems abstract until you see Howard standing near this mountain stream, contemplating the disappearance of the trout he is working to save.
To discover what else global warming might have in store for Georgia, we consulted scores of published studies, talked to dozens of scientists around the country and studied assessments compiled by regional, national and international panels of experts. The predictions range from the almost benign to the downright disastrous.
In a report released in April, for example, the National Science and Technology Council tried to predict the impact of climate change on the United States. The council used two computer climate models, one in Canada, the other at the Hadley Centre for Climate Change in the United Kingdom.
The Hadley model predicts a warmer and wetter climate for Georgia, with an average warming of about 5 degrees Fahrenheit and gradually increasing rainfall. Here in the North Georgia mountains, the Hadley scenario would force the brook trout and a few other mountain creatures farther north, out of Georgia. But the mountains, like most of the state, would remain much the same. The temperate forests of mixed hardwoods and pines that now cover the state would remain.
Under the Canadian model, however, the changes would be far more dramatic. Average annual temperatures rise by 9 degrees, and because the Atlantic storm track moves eastward, out over the ocean, rainfall in the eastern United States would drop significantly.
As soon as 2030, annual rainfall in the Southeast declines by 20 percent under the Canadian scenario, a devastating permanent drought that would reduce streams like this to a relative trickle. Most of the lush North Georgia mountains, dominated by red oaks, rhododendrons, pines and mountain laurel, would become open savannas much like those in Florida.
Only here, in the highest, coolest reaches of the Georgia mountains, would a remnant of the Southern forests still cling to life.
"Current Southern ecosystems might be even more productive and more efficient than they are now," says Ron Neilson, a biogeographer with the U.S. Forest Service in Corvallis, Ore. "You'd have more rainfall and warmer temperatures. But the higher temperatures and lower rainfall produced in the Canadian model --- they would have profound consequences for your region."
So which forecast is more likely to be accurate?
"If the models all give the same answer about a particular outcome, we get a sense that they're probably right," says Robert Dickenson, professor of atmosphere dynamics and climate at Georgia Tech. "If they give different answers, as they have for the Southeast, then we have to look at the models as giving us a range of possibilities."
Both models predict an increase in the July heat index --- a combination of heat and humidity.  The Hadley model predicts an increase of 8 to 15 degrees, the Canadian one an increase of 25 degrees or more.
Those conditions "may serve to decrease population migration toward the Southeast," the science council report warns.
"If the projected rise in the heat index were to occur," the federal report concludes, "summertime conditions for New York City could become like those now experienced in Atlanta, those in Atlanta like those now experienced in Houston and those in Houston like those in Panama."
 
mpact in Vienna
Chuck Ellis is on the telephone, giving directions to his office in Vienna, about 55 miles south of Macon.
"You just go a couple blocks past the red light," says Ellis, the agricultural extension agent for Dooly County. "It's the only red light in town. It's the only red light in the county, for that matter."
Vienna --- pronounced Vy-enna --- is a little farm town of less than 3,000. The surrounding countryside is lush with cotton and peanut plants, and the town itself is dominated by the infrastructure of modern agriculture: tractor shops, fertilizer tanks, crop-storage silos and well-worn, mud-splattered pickup trucks.
It's doesn't seem like the kind of place on the cutting edge of anything. But for 15 years, Ellis and the farmers of Dooly County may have been pioneers in dealing with the impact of climate change.
Since the mid-'80s, Ellis says, local farmers have had to struggle with long periods of drought interspersed with torrential rain and even floods. In 1994, for example, Ellis was called in to aid in the disaster relief effort in the nearby towns of Albany and Montezuma after heavy rains flooded the Flint River, killing 30.
Can he recall the last year of normal rainfall?
"Normal? What's that?" Ellis chuckles.
Aris Georgakakos, director of the Georgia Water Resources Institute at Georgia Tech, believes that pattern of irregular rainfall may be an early harbinger of a rapidly changing climate.
"The computer models project the climate going through cycles that are more intense, with more variability in rainfall," Georgakakos says. "And if you look at the record, you see just that kind of pattern happening around the state."
That irregular rainfall has already forced Dooly County farmers to change how they do things, says Ellis.  Farmers are also adopting new techniques that help retain water on their fields.
Ironically, say scientists, the rainfall worries of Dooly County farmers might be eased with help from a very unlikely source.
The primary gas implicated in global warming is carbon dioxide, which is released when fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas are burned for energy. Once in the atmosphere, CO2 acts like a glass greenhouse. It allows solar energy to penetrate to the Earth's surface, then traps the heat before it can escape into space. Both the Hadley and Canadian models assume that we will continue to rely on fossil fuels, and that CO2 levels will double by 2100.
However, carbon dioxide also plays a critical role in photosynthesis. If the concentration of C02 in the atmosphere doubles by 2100, research suggests that it could also double the rate of photosynthesis in some plants. Additional C02 also reduces the amount of water that a plant requires. It could partially offset less rainfall.
Thanks in part to more C02, per-acre yields of unirrigated peanuts could rise 14 to 17 percent in Georgia by the end of the century, research by Shrikent Jagtap, a professor of agriculture and biological engineering at the University of Florida, predicts. Peanut yields on irrigated land would rise 2 to 7 percent.
Overall, agricultural productivity in the Southeast would increase by more than 10 percent by 2030 and by more than 20 percent by 2100, computer crop models show.
Like Jagtap's work, those models assume climate change will follow the more moderate Hadley pattern. If instead the climate follows the hotter, drier course suggested in the Canadian scenario, the result is disaster. The report of the National Science and Technology Council refers to "rather dramatic negative effects" on agriculture in the Southeast, which is an understatement. By 2030, studies predict a decline in the Southeast's agricultural output of more than 60 percent under the Canadian model.
In the end, even the more friendly Hadley model could spell trouble for agriculture in the Southeast.
"The South's problem is that it's already warm to begin with," says Linda Mearns, a scientist with the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado. "Other regions are going to benefit a lot more than you are from global warming."
For example, although productivity could jump by 10 or 20 percent here in the South, crop models predict that agricultural productivity will rise by 120 percent in the Great Lakes region, mainly because warmer temperatures would lengthen its growing season.
"We know there are changes coming," says Ellis. "They always do. We have to do more research, and we have to use that research to educate people, which is what I do here. We have to prepare in case it comes, and that way we'll be OK if it doesn't."
 
Options for the coast
In the yellow light of early evening, the marshes of coastal Georgia almost glow with an eerie green phosphorescence. The roads are busy with summer traffic as families flee the beach and head back to their air-conditioned hotel rooms, condos or rental homes.
But those beautiful marshes and beaches that enticed them here are in danger of disappearing.
"When you speak in terms of geologic time, the oceans have fallen and risen many times," says David Evans, assistant administrator at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA. "And every time in the past, the marshes and beaches have just moved as the ocean moved. But this time, there's a wrinkle in the process."
That wrinkle, says Evans, is the built environment --- the roads, parking lots, homes and businesses that now line the coast. As the sea advances, marshes and beaches will naturally attempt to move inland as well. But as they do, they'll run smack up against those man-made structures.
That leaves mankind two options. We can retreat, pulling back from the coast and allowing nature to take its course. Private and public property would be lost, but the marshes and beaches that give the coast its character would have room to rebuild themselves.
The second option is to build seawalls and bulkheads along the coast, to hold the sea in its place and protect private property from the encroaching ocean. By doing so, however, the gentle transition zones between sea and land would disappear. The coastline would be "armored," with seawalls and levees.
"As a scientist, I have an easy answer on that issue," says Evans. "I just say it's a political decision."
When you walk along the beach on Jekyll Island, you can see the problem already taking shape. It's still about four hours to high tide, and in many places the beach has already disappeared. Ocean waves are breaking directly onto rock walls erected to protect inland property.
Recent research led by Stephen Leatherman, a professor at Florida International University in Miami, attributes much of the beach erosion on Jekyll and elsewhere to the early impact of a rising sea.
Years ago, when scientists first began warning about global warming, the specter of rising sea levels seemed to grab public attention. There was talk of coastal cities being abandoned, of half of Florida disappearing beneath the Atlantic Ocean, of the polar ice caps melting into the ocean and moving the coast inland by miles.
Since then, more sophisticated computer models have greatly moderated the amount of sea rise expected. The polar ice caps are now considered safe, and scientists predict a sea rise of just 19 inches in the next century, with a possible range of between 5 inches and 37 inches.
The cause of that rise is relatively simple.
Take a look at a thermometer: As the temperature increases, the liquid in the glass tube expands and rises. The same phenomenon accounts for a rising sea level under global warming. If the planet warms, sea water will also warm. And as the water warms, the oceans will expand and rise in their sea beds.
In some parts of the country, including Georgia, the impact of rising seas will be compounded by a sinking land mass. At Fort Pulaski, near Savannah, scientists say the land has been sinking at about a foot a century. Leatherman thinks that sinking may be caused by overpumping of the Floridan aquifer, the source of fresh water for coastal communities and industry. As water is pumped out of the aquifer, the land settles.
Combine those two effects --- a best-guess rise of 19 inches in sea level over the next century and a continued drop of a foot along coastal Georgia --- and parts of the coast would experience a 31-inch rise in sea level.
In other parts of the country, a rise that size may not have much impact. On the steep, craggy coast of Maine, for example, a two-foot rise in sea level would just move the ocean higher up the rocks. Along the gently sloping Georgia coast, however, a 31-inch rise would on average bring the ocean inland by about 175 yards.
It's also a serious cause for alarm on barrier islands. Left to nature, islands such as Jekyll, Cumberland, St. Simons and Sapelo would migrate inland, pushed toward shore by storms and the rising sea. Scientists fear man-made structures would keep the islands in place, and as a result make them more vulnerable to storms.
However, Leatherman says that Georgia's barrier islands are less vulnerable to rising seas than those in other coastal areas.
"The good news is that your barrier islands are short and stubby, with some elevation on them," Leatherman says. "They're going to fare much better than the islands of the Outer Banks in North Carolina, for example. Those islands are long and skinny, and they're going to be in real trouble."
The sun is setting on the coast now, and the green marshes take on an almost golden hue. Flocks of white wading birds erupt from the marshes and make their way in the fading light to the trees where they'll roost for the night. Later, on the beaches of the barrier islands, endangered loggerhead turtles will come to shore, dig a hole in the sand and lay their eggs, just as they have for thousands of years.
But if the marshes and the beaches disappear, the turtles, birds and other creatures will disappear with them.
  
Potential toll on trees
Burke County, about 50 miles south of Augusta, doesn't look much like Texas or Nebraska. At least not yet. The countryside here is dominated by trees --- acre after acre, row after row of pine trees, most raised for pulp to make paper.
Burke is also one of the poorest counties in the state. In 1998, its per capita income of $15,607 ranked 154th of the state's 159 counties. Yet that year, roughly $40 million in timber was pulled off its land.
The county has a lot at stake with global warming. If the climate turns warmer and wetter, as the Hadley model projects, productivity of southern pine plantations is expected to increase by 11 percent by 2040. Most of that increased growth would come from the effects of additional C02 in the atmosphere.
But there's another possibility. In 30 years, the trees could all be gone. If rainfall declines 20 percent as projected by the Canadian scenario, most of Georgia's coastal plain, now part of the nation's "woodbasket," would be converted into open grasslands like that of Texas or Nebraska. Runoff into the nearby Savannah River would drop by 61 percent by 2030.
Without rainfall, the trees would dry out and become vulnerable to beetles and other pests. Lightning-caused fire would increase by 25 to 50 percent and would become the Southeast's prime landscape architect.
"We know drought is going to come every so often," says Ed Stephens, who owns more than 200 acres of timberland in Burke County. "It's just part of what we deal with. But if this global warming plays out like these scientists say . . .  boy, I guess we'll just have to move."
However, if scientists are right about the climate, those farmers might be better off switching to hardwoods and mixed pine plantations. Hardwoods require less water than pines. Under the Hadley scenario, hardwood productivity in the Southeast rises by 22 percent by 2040, compared to 11 percent for pines.
"It's scary," says Mark Raines, Burke County agent for the Georgia Forestry Commission. "The last few years we've seen an increase in pine-beetle infestations, which to me means the trees are suffering from drought stress." He also notes a significant increase in lightning fires in Burke County the past two years.
For natural forests in the region, the outlook is less promising. Research suggests that most trees will not be able to take full advantage of increased C02 because of a lack of other nutrients in the soil. In the managed tree plantations that dominate much of south and central Georgia, foresters could overcome that problem by adding fertilizers and adjusting the genetic makeup of trees to take full advantage of a warmer climate.
"There's a lot that we still don't know that could have a very negative environmental impact," says Rodney Will, an assistant professor at the University of Georgia's School of Forestry. "But for purposes of plantation forestry, the effect will probably be beneficial. The more controlled the system, the easier it is to capture the effect of enhanced CO2."
However, if the state's climate moves toward the drier Canadian model rather than the Hadley model, all bets are off. Even trees in managed plantations would have a hard time.
And for people in Burke County, already struggling to make a living, that's worrisome. "Look at this," says Raines, waving a pamphlet on global warming published by the state forestry commission. "It says that the United States has only 5 percent of the world's population, but we produce a quarter of the carbon dioxide. We're the ones causing this problem. We're the ones who have to fix it."
 
Scientists embrace theory
But all that, of course, still begs the real question: Is global warming real?
For those of us who aren't scientists, it's impossible to make an independent, educated judgment on that.
As a rule, though, scientists are very protective of their reputations. They don't like conjecture, and they're reluctant to go out on a limb. So their willingness to embrace the theory of rapid, man-made climate change is a pretty good indication of their confidence. If they turn out to be wrong, the global warming scare will go down as the biggest embarrassment in the history of science.
It's also telling how closely the theoretical work of scientists is being echoed by independent reports from people who live on the land and are intimate with its rhythms.
Lee Howard says that in one North Georgia watershed, weather changes over the past eight years have driven brook trout about a mile farther upstream, seeking cooler water.
Chuck Ellis says that 10 years ago, maybe 25 percent of Dooly County's cropland was irrigated. Now it's doubled, to about 50 percent.
And in timber-dependent Burke County, Mark Raines reports that for the past five years, some tree farmers have begun to plant drought-tolerant pine seedlings purchased from East Texas.
If those signs of global warming prove correct, the question then becomes more specific: What direction will warming take? The Canadian and Hadley models are just two of several global models, and the climate could change in ways unanticipated by any of them.
For technical reasons, some scientists studying climate change in the Southeast tend to favor the Hadley scenario as more accurate for the region. They also point out that if the Canadian scenario does prove more accurate, the changes would be so dramatic that trying to anticipate their impact would be almost hopeless.
However, as U.S. scientists were concluding their national assessment this spring, the Hadley Centre in Great Britain released a third generation of its model, which it believes is more accurate. The results are sobering.
"The newest results from the Hadley," says David Easterling, principal scientist for the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C. "are beginning to resemble the Canadian model."

Graphic

 
Photo:
A great egret tests the waters on Jekyll Island, where beach erosion is attributed to the early impact of rising seas under global warming. Higher temperatures also would prevent mountain streams from being able to maintain brook trout (below)./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
Jabori Williams, 3, of Brunswick (above), plays in the surf at Jekyll Island./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
The Atlantic Ocean advances on St. Simons Island (top). Jabori Williams, 3, of Brunswick (above), plays in the surf at Jekyll Island. Along Georgia's coast, options for the future are to retreat and let nature take its course, or build bulkheads to keep the sea in place./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
If the marshes --- such as this one between St. Simons Island and Brunswick --- and the beaches disappear, the turtles, birds and other creatures will disappear with them./ LOUIE FAVORITE / Staff Photo:
The already endangered would vanish from its native Georgia if mountain streams become too warm./ CURTIS COMPTON / Staff Photo:
Fishing guide Lee Howard leans out over a creek near Hiawassee in pursuit of brook trout. The fish would be pushed out of the area by global warming./ CURTIS COMPTON / Staff
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FISHES (90%); GLOBAL WARMING (90%); FORESTRY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); MOUNTAINS (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); WEATHER (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (78%); MODELING & SIMULATION (77%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (76%); ZOOLOGY (76%); VOLUNTEERS (69%)

Company: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT LLC  (52%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT LLC  (52%);    TROUT UNLIMITED   (56%);  TROUT UNLIMITED  (56%)

Organization: TROUT UNLIMITED   (56%);  TROUT UNLIMITED  (56%)

Industry: GLOBAL WARMING (90%); FORESTRY & ENVIRONMENT (89%); FORESTRY & LOGGING (89%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (89%); MODELING & SIMULATION (77%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (91%); ONTARIO, CANADA (57%); CANADA (92%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (72%)

Load-Date: July 29, 2001


End of Document


CLIMATE CHANGE; In Atlanta, Gore warns of climate change risks
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 17, 2017 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 533 words
Byline: Alexis Stevens

Staff
Highlight: Ex-VP urges unity in efforts to fight effects across globe.
Body


A climate change meeting in Atlanta on Thursday had all the ingredients of a political spectacle.
With Donald Trump, a noted skeptic of climate change science winning the White House, a nervous federal agency scrapped plans to host the event. Enter Al Gore. The former vice president helped revive the conference and took to the podium Thursday to talk about his signature issue.
But it was science -- not politics -- that carried the day.
In the climate and health meeting held at The Carter Center, Gore, a former Democratic presidential candidate, steered clear of mentioning Trump. Instead, he stressed that climate changes could render parts of the Middle East -- including some of the holiest cities on the planet -- uninhabitable. It could also cause deadly health problems and reduce life expectancy. Those in poverty will be hardest hit, he said.
The event was supposed to be a three-day conference held at the Centers for Disease Control. But when that event was cancelled following the presidential election, Gore helped organize a condensed, one-day meeting instead.
Gore urged scientists and health care providers to unite in efforts to combat the effects of climate change.
Among the most serious problems presented to conference attendees was the belief that the rising heat index could make parts of the world uninhabitable, Gore said.
"This is a relatively new finding, that in some areas of the Middle East and north Africa, there will be, according to the scientific predictions, areas that will no longer be fit for human habitation -- beyond the limits for human survival," Gore said. "The holy cities of Mecca and Medina are in this zone. Two years in Iran, the heat index -- the combination of temperature and humidity -- reached 165 degrees Fahrenheit.
"No human being can live for more than a few hours outdoors in those conditions," Gore said.
Despite the gloomy outlook, Gore said there are ways to deal with the effects of climate change, but those will take collaboration both in the U.S. and abroad.
"We do have the solutions at hand,"Gore said. "Hope is justified.We are going to win this. We have solutions that are now readily available."
Experts from Columbia University, Harvard University, the University of Wisconsin the World Health Organization and the CDC were among the speakers and panelists at the fast-paced conference.
"We're doing three days in one day," Gore joked at the microphone during sessions.
Atlanta resident Cindy Powell, who has worked in critical care, attended the conference because she's returning to school and is interested in public health. She was saddened the initial conference was cancelled, but said Thursday's meeting was a resilient effort.
"It's better than nothing. It's a start," Powell said. "The positive forces of the world intend to move forward regardless."
Leslie Bass, a commercial photography student, didn't know exactly what she'd be attending as part of an internship. But she was shocked at the staggering numbers of health issues and deaths related to climate changes.
"This is way bigger than politics, but politics in our country are going to hinder progress," Bass said. "It's not some myth. These are not alternative facts."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: TALKS & MEETINGS (92%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (91%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (90%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (88%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (77%); LIFE EXPECTANCY (75%); MEDICINE & HEALTH (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (72%); TRENDS & EVENTS (72%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (70%); NEGATIVE NEWS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%)

Organization: CARTER CENTER (57%); CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL & PREVENTION (56%)

Industry: HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (70%); HEALTH CARE (52%)

Person: AL GORE (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (88%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); NORTHERN AFRICA (78%); MIDDLE EAST (71%)

Load-Date: February 17, 2017


End of Document


Climate change shows carbon price needed in budget
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 15, 2021 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2021 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: MAIN; Pg. 15A
Length: 167 words
Byline: Staff
Body


In July, western fires hazed eastern states’ skies, painting the full moon a mysterious Mars-like orange. Then, in early August, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a red alert that human activity is unequivocally causing climate change! Then, the headline “Dozens killed in Northeast by storm’s remnants” (News, Sept. 3). Subways flooded and the story read, “Experts said it was slightly exacerbated by climate change — warmer air holds more rain.” For years, climate scientists have been saying that humancaused climate change is a threat multiplier strengthening hurricanes and increasing rainfall.
July’s carbon dioxide levels in our skies were 416 parts per million, while back in the 1830s they were around 284 parts per million. That excess results from human activity, especially burning fossil fuels.
It’s time we act responsibly. Adding a carbon price to the budget reconciliation package makes sense. Like getting a COVID-19 vaccine, it reduces future threats.
BOB JAMES, ATLANTA
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspapers

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); WEATHER (78%); US OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT (77%); HURRICANES (76%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS VACCINE (73%); EARTH & ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE (73%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (67%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (67%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (67%); VACCINES (52%); pagesuite (%)

Industry: US OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT (77%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS VACCINE (73%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (73%); VACCINES (52%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (58%)

Load-Date: September 15, 2021


End of Document







| About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2021 LexisNexis 






Page 5 of 6Biden administration’s immigration policies more pressing issue for nation than climate change


 


 



Page 7 of 8AJC EXPLAINER CLIMATE POLITICS; ; How climate 'change' turned into a 'crisis'


 


 



Page 10 of 11AJC SPECIAL REPORT; Alarm, skepticism greet climate change warning


 


 



Page 15 of 16READERS WRITE Donald Trump can't have it both ways Climate scientists losing their credibility Grandchildren will suffer for climate change


 


 



Page 17 of 18Climate-change claims in 2012


 


 



Page 21 of 22CLIMATE CHANGE; CDC cancels climate change, health summit


 


 



Page 24 of 25Reverse climate change: Plant and preserve global forestland


 


 



Page 27 of 28GLOBAL WARMING IN GEORGIA: Southern-fried FORECAST;Will climate changes be mild or dire? The latest news is chilling


 


 



Page 35 of 36CLIMATE CHANGE; In Atlanta, Gore warns of climate change risks


 


 



Page 38 of 38Climate change shows carbon price needed in budget


 


 

